 

 

 

 
 ADVANCE VERSION 
 
 
United Nations 
 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
Distr.: General 
 
17 March 2023 
 
Original: English 
 

 
Conference of the Parties 
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-seventh session, held in Sharm el-Sheikh from 6 to 20 November 2022 
 
 
 

 
Addendum 
 
 
Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session 
 
Contents 
 
 
 
 Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties 
 
 
 
 Decision 
 
 Page 
 
1/CP.27 Sharm el-Sheikh Implementation Plan ............................................................................ 
 
2 
 
2/CP.27 Funding arrangements for responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage .... 
 
11 
 
3/CP.27 Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security .................................................................................................................... 
 
16 
 
4/CP.27 Revision of the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review ...... 
 
21 
 
5/CP.27 Revision of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis ... 
 
22 
 
6/CP.27 Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention ............................................................................ 
 
23 
 
7/CP.27 Common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks .................. 
 
25 
 
8/CP.27 Report of the Adaptation Committee for 2022 and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee ......................................... 
 
26 
 
9/CP.27 National adaptation plans ................................................................................................ 
 
27 
 
10/CP.27 Matters relating to the least developed countries ............................................................ 
 
29 
 
11/CP.27 Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts ..................................... 
 
37 
 
12/CP.27 Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts ........................................... 
 
48 
 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 1/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Sharm el-Sheikh Implementation Plan 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.19, 1/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 1/CP.22, 1/CP.23, 1/CP.24, 1/CP.25 
 
and 1/CP.26, 
 
 Noting decision 1/CMA.4, 
 
 Being guided by science and principles, 
 
 Reaffirming the outcomes of all previous sessions of the Conferences of the Parties, Conferences of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and Conferences of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, including decisions 1/CP.26, 1/CMP.16 and 1/CMA.3 (the Glasgow Climate Pact), Also reaffirming the critical role of multilateralism based on United Nations values and principles, including in the context of the implementation of the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and the importance of international cooperation for addressing global issues, including climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, 
 
 Noting the importance of transitioning to sustainable lifestyles and sustainable patterns of consumption and production in efforts to address climate change, Also noting the importance of pursuing an approach to education that promotes a shift in lifestyles while fostering patterns of development and sustainability based on care, community and cooperation, 
 
 Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind and that Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity, 
 
 Noting the importance of ensuring the integrity of all ecosystems, including in forests, the ocean and the cryosphere, and the protection of biodiversity, recognized by some cultures as Mother Earth, and also noting the importance of ‘climate justice’, when taking action to address climate change, 
 
 Emphasizing that enhanced effective climate action should be implemented in a manner that is just and inclusive while minimizing negative social or economic impacts that may arise from climate action, 
 
 Recognizing the fundamental priority of safeguarding food security and ending hunger, and the particular vulnerabilities of food production systems to the adverse impacts of climate change, 
 
 Also recognizing the critical role of protecting, conserving and restoring water systems and water-related ecosystems in delivering climate adaptation benefits and co-benefits, while ensuring social and environmental safeguards, 1. 
 
 Underlines the urgent need to address, in a comprehensive and synergetic manner, the interlinked global crises of climate change and biodiversity loss in the broader context of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as the vital importance of protecting, conserving, restoring and sustainably using nature and ecosystems for effective and sustainable climate action; 
 
2. 
 
 Acknowledges that the impacts of climate change exacerbate the global energy and food crises, and vice versa, particularly in developing countries; 2 
 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
3. 
 
 Stresses that the increasingly complex and challenging global geopolitical situation and its impact on the energy, food and economic situations, as well as the additional challenges associated with the socioeconomic recovery from the coronavirus disease 2019 
 
pandemic, should not be used as a pretext for backtracking, backsliding or de-prioritizing climate action; 
 

 
II. Science and urgency 
4. 
 
 Welcomes the contributions of Working Groups II1 and III2 to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; 5. 
 
 Recognizes the importance of the best available science for effective climate action and policymaking; 
 
6. 
 
 Takes note of the 2022 adaptation gap3 and emissions gap4 reports of the United Nations Environment Programme, and recent global and regional reports of the World Meteorological Organization on the state of the climate;5 
 
7. 
 
 Reiterates that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at the temperature increase of 1.5 °C compared with 2 °C6 and resolves to pursue further efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C; 
 
8. 
 
 Recognizes the impacts of climate change on the cryosphere and the need for further understanding of these impacts, including of tipping points; III. Enhancing ambition and implementation 
 
9. 
 
 Resolves to implement ambitious, just, equitable and inclusive transitions to low-emission and climate-resilient development in line with the principles and objectives of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, taking into account this decision, the Glasgow Climate Pact and other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement; 10. 
 
 Expresses appreciation to the Heads of State and Government who participated in the Sharm el-Sheikh Climate Implementation Summit for their support in enhancing and accelerating the implementation of climate action; 
 

 
IV. Energy 
11. 
 
 Emphasizes the urgent need for immediate, deep, rapid and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions by Parties across all applicable sectors, including through 1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. H Pörtner, D Roberts, M Tignor, et al. (eds.). 
 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/. 
 
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. P Shukla, J Skea, R Slade, et al. (eds.). Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/. 
 
3 See United Nations Environment Programme. 2022. Adaptation Gap Report 2022: Too Little, Too Slow – Climate adaptation failure puts world at risk. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme. Available at https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2022. 
 
4 See United Nations Environment Programme. 2022. Emissions Gap Report 2022: The Closing Window – Climate crisis calls for rapid transformation of societies. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme. Available at https://www.unep.org/resources/emissions-gap-report-2022. 
 
5 See, for example, World Meteorological Organization. 2022. State of the Global Climate 2021. 
 
Geneva: World Meteorological Organization. Available at 
 
https://library.wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=22080#.Y5cGUHbMKUk. 
 
6 Decisions 1/CP.26, para. 16, and 1/CMA.3, para. 21. 
 

 
3 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
increasing the use of low-emission and renewable energy, just energy transition partnerships and other cooperative actions; 
 
12. 
 
 Recognizes that the unprecedented global energy crisis underlines the urgency to rapidly transform energy systems to be more secure, reliable and resilient, including by accelerating clean and just transitions to renewable energy during this critical decade of action; 
 
13. 
 
 Stresses the importance of enhancing a clean energy mix, including low-emission and renewable energy, at all levels as part of diversifying energy mixes and systems, in line with national circumstances and recognizing the need for support towards just transitions; V. Mitigation 
 
14. 
 
 Recognizes that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C requires rapid, deep and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions of 43 per cent by 2030 relative to the 2019 
 
level; 
 
15. 
 
 Also recognizes that this requires accelerated action in this critical decade, on the basis of equity and the best available scientific knowledge, reflecting common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty; 16. 
 
 Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies, and the adoption of policies, to transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the deployment of clean power generation and energy efficiency measures, including accelerating efforts towards the phasedown of unabated coal power and phase-out of inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, while providing targeted support to the poorest and most vulnerable in line with national circumstances and recognizing the need for support towards a just transition; 17. 
 
 Reiterates 7 its invitation to Parties to consider further actions to reduce by 2030 non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions, including methane; 18. 
 
 Emphasizes the importance of protecting, conserving and restoring nature and ecosystems to achieve the Paris Agreement temperature goal, including through forests and other terrestrial and marine ecosystems acting as sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases and by protecting biodiversity, while ensuring social and environmental safeguards; 19. 
 
 Recognizes the importance of maximizing the positive and minimizing the negative economic and social impacts of the implementation of response measures and welcomes the adoption of decisions 20/CP.27, 7/CMP.17 and 23/CMA.4; VI. Adaptation 
 
20. 
 
 Notes with serious concern the existing gap between current levels of adaptation and levels needed to respond to the adverse effects of climate change in line with findings from the contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; 
 
21. 
 
 Urges Parties to adopt a transformational approach to enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change; 22. 
 
 Also urges developed country Parties to urgently and significantly scale up their provision of climate finance, technology transfer and capacity-building for adaptation so as to respond to the needs of developing country Parties as part of a global effort, including for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans and adaptation communications; 
 
23. 
 
 Highlights the role of the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund in supporting actions by developing countries to address climate change, 7 Decision 1/CP.26, para. 19. 
 

 
4 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 welcomes the pledges made to the two Funds and invites developed countries to further contribute to the two Funds; 
 
24. 
 
 Emphasizes the importance of protecting, conserving and restoring water and water-related ecosystems, including river basins, aquifers and lakes, and urges Parties to further integrate water into adaptation efforts; 
 

 
VII. Loss and damage 
25. 
 
 Notes with grave concern, according to information in the contributions of Working Groups II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the growing gravity, scope and frequency in all regions of loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, resulting in devastating economic and non-economic losses, including forced displacement and impacts on cultural heritage, human mobility and the lives and livelihoods of local communities, and underlines the importance of an adequate and effective response to loss and damage; 26. 
 
 Expresses deep concern regarding the significant financial costs associated with loss and damage for developing countries, resulting in a growing debt burden and impairing the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals; 
 
27. 
 
 Welcomes the consideration, for the first time, of matters relating to funding arrangements responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage, under the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement and also welcomes the adoption of decisions 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4, on matters relating to funding arrangements responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
28. 
 
 Further welcomes the adoption of decisions 11/CP.27 and 12/CMA.4, establishing the institutional arrangements of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change to enable its full operationalization, including supporting its mandated role in catalysing technical assistance for the implementation of the relevant approaches at the local, national and regional level in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, and affirms its determination to select the host of the secretariat of the Santiago network by 2023 through a selection process conducted in an open, transparent, fair and neutral manner in accordance with the process outlined in paragraphs 19–23 of the decisions referred to above; 
 
VIII. Early warning and systematic observation 
 
29. 
 
 Emphasizes the need to address existing gaps in the Global Climate Observing System, particularly in developing countries, and recognizes that one third of the world, including 60 per cent of Africa, does not have access to early warning and climate information services, as well as the need to enhance coordination of activities by the systematic observation community and the ability to provide useful and actionable climate information for mitigation, adaptation and early warning systems, as well as information to enable understanding of adaptation limits and of attribution of extreme events; 30. 
 
 Welcomes and reiterates the United Nations Secretary-General’s call made on World Meteorological Day on 23 March 2022 to protect everyone on Earth through universal coverage of early warning systems against extreme weather and climate change within the next five years and invites development partners, international financial institutions and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to provide support for implementation of the Early Warnings for All initiative; 
 

 
5 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
IX. Implementation – pathways to just transition 
 
31. 
 
 Affirms that sustainable and just solutions to the climate crisis must be founded on meaningful and effective social dialogue and participation of all stakeholders and notes that the global transition to low emissions provides opportunities and challenges for sustainable economic development and poverty eradication; 
 
32. 
 
 Emphasizes that just and equitable transition encompasses pathways that include energy, socioeconomic, workforce and other dimensions, all of which must be based on nationally defined development priorities and include social protection so as to mitigate potential impacts associated with the transition, and highlights the important role of the instruments related to social solidarity and protection in mitigating the impacts of applied measures; 
 

 
X. Finance 
33. 
 
 Highlights that about USD 4 trillion per year needs to be invested in clean energy technologies by 2030 to be able to reach net zero emissions by 2050,8 and that, furthermore, a global transformation to a low-carbon economy is expected to require an investment of at least USD 4– 6 trillion per year;9 
 
34. 
 
 Also highlights that delivering such funding will require a transformation of the financial system and its structures and processes, engaging governments, central banks, commercial banks, institutional investors and other financial actors; 35. 
 
 Notes with concern the growing gap between the needs of developing country Parties, in particular those due to the increasing impacts of climate change and their increased indebtedness, and the support provided and mobilized for their efforts to implement their nationally determined contributions, highlighting that such needs are currently estimated at USD 5.8–5.9 trillion10 for the pre-2030 period; 
 
36. 
 
 Expresses serious concern that the goal of developed country Parties to mobilize jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation has not yet been met and urges developed country Parties to meet the goal;11 
 
37. 
 
 Emphasizes that accelerated financial support for developing countries from developed countries and other sources is critical to enhancing mitigation action and addressing inequities in access to finance, including its costs, terms and conditions, and economic vulnerability to climate change for developing countries,12 and that scaled-up public grants for mitigation and adaptation for vulnerable regions, in particular sub-Saharan Africa, would be cost-effective and have high social returns in terms of access to basic energy; 
 
8 See International Energy Agency. 2022. World Energy Outlook 2022. Paris: International Energy Agency. Available at https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022. 
 
9 As footnote 4 above. 
 
10 See Standing Committee on Finance. 2021. First report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement. Bonn: UNFCCC. Available at https://unfccc.int/topics/climate-finance/workstreams/needs-report. 
 
11 See Standing Committee on Finance. 2022. Report on progress towards achieving the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation. Bonn: UNFCCC. 
 
Available at https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/bodies/constituted-bodies/standing-committee-
 
on-finance-scf/progress-report. 
 
12 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. Summary for Policymakers. In: H Pörtner, D 
 
Roberts, M Tignor, et al. (eds.). Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
 
 Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at 
 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/. 
 

 
6 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
38. 
 
 Notes that global climate finance flows are small relative to the overall needs of developing countries, with such flows in 2019–2020 estimated to be USD 803 billion,13 
 
which is 31–32 per cent of the annual investment needed to keep the global temperature rise well below 2 °C or at 1.5 °C, and also below what would be expected in the light of the investment opportunities identified and the cost of failure to meet climate stabilization targets; 
 
39. 
 
 Urges developed country Parties to provide enhanced support, including through financial resources, technology transfer and capacity-building, to assist developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation, in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention, and encourages other Parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily; 
 
40. 
 
 Calls on the shareholders of multilateral development banks and international financial institutions to reform multilateral development bank practices and priorities, align and scale up funding, ensure simplified access and mobilize climate finance from various sources and encourages multilateral development banks to define a new vision and commensurate operational model, channels and instruments that are fit for the purpose of adequately addressing the global climate emergency, including deploying a full suite of instruments, from grants to guarantees and non-debt instruments, taking into account debt burdens, and to address risk appetite, with a view to substantially increasing climate finance; 41. 
 
 Calls on multilateral development banks to contribute to significantly increasing climate ambition using the breadth of their policy and financial instruments for greater results, including on private capital mobilization, and to ensure higher financial efficiency and maximize use of existing concessional and risk capital vehicles to drive innovation and accelerate impact; 
 
42. 
 
 Emphasizes the ongoing challenges faced by many developing country Parties in accessing climate finance and encourages further efforts, including by the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, to simplify access to such finance; 43. 
 
 Takes note of the report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement14 and in this context urges developed country Parties to provide resources for the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund while demonstrating progression from the previous replenishment and in line with the programming capacity of the Fund; 
 

 
XI. Technology transfer and deployment 
44. 
 
 Welcomes with appreciation the first joint work programme of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network,15 for 2023–2027, which will facilitate the transformational change needed to achieve the goals of the Convention and the Paris Agreement, invites Parties and stakeholders to cooperate and engage with the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to support the implementation of the joint work programme activities, including on technology needs assessments, action plans and road maps, acknowledges the findings in the final report on the first periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement16 and decides that the main challenges identified therein should be considered under the global stocktake; 
 
45. 
 
 Highlights the importance of cooperation on technology development and transfer and innovation in implementing the joint work programme activities; 
 
46. 
 
 Welcomes the forward-looking conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to continue consideration of the Poznan strategic programme on technology 
transfer at its sixty-first session (November 2024)17 with the aim of supporting the implementation of relevant activities, such as those identified and prioritized in developing countries’ nationally determined contributions, national adaptation plans, technology needs assessments and technology action plans, and long-term strategies; XII. Capacity-building 
 
47. 
 
 Notes that capacity gaps and needs still exist in developing countries and calls on developed country Parties to increase support for long-term country-driven capacity-building interventions to enhance the effectiveness, success and sustainability of those interventions; XIII. Taking stock 
 
48. 
 
 Notes the importance of the periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and welcomes the adoption of decision 21/CP.27, on the second periodic review of the long-term global goal under the Convention and of overall progress towards achieving it; 
 

 
XIV. Ocean 
49. 
 
 Welcomes the outcomes of and key messages18 from the ocean and climate change dialogue19 in 2022 and decides that future dialogues will, from 2023, be facilitated by two co-facilitators, selected by Parties biennially, who will be responsible for deciding the topics for and conducting the dialogue, in consultation with Parties and observers, and preparing an informal summary report to be presented in conjunction with the subsequent session of the Conference of the Parties; 
 
50. 
 
 Encourages Parties to consider, as appropriate, ocean-based action in their national climate goals and in the implementation of these goals, including but not limited to nationally determined contributions, long-term strategies and adaptation communications; 
 

 
XV. Forest 
51. 
 
 Recalls that, in the context of the provision of adequate and predictable support to developing country Parties, Parties should collectively aim to slow, halt and reverse forest cover and carbon loss, in accordance with national circumstances, consistently with the ultimate objective of the Convention, as stated in its Article 2;20 
 
52. 
 
 Encourages Parties to consider, as appropriate, nature-based solutions or ecosystem-based approaches, taking into consideration United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 5/5,21 for their mitigation and adaptation action while ensuring relevant social and environmental safeguards; 
 

 
XVI. Agriculture 
53. 
 
 Welcomes the establishment of the four-year Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security, as well as the establishment of the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal under the joint work, by decision 3/CP.27; 17 See FCCC/SBI/2022/20, paras. 77–84. 
 
18 Available at https://unfccc.int/documents/615101. 
 
19 Mandated in decision 1/CP.26, para. 61. 
 
20 Decisions 1/CP.16 and 9/CP.19. 
 
21 UNEP/EA.5/Res.5. 
 

 
8 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
XVII. Enhancing implementation: action by non-Party stakeholders 54. 
 
 Acknowledges the engagement of non-Party stakeholders in climate action, which complements and broadens it, while recognizing the pivotal role of governments in action on climate change within the framework of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement; 
 
55. 
 
 Recognizes the important role of indigenous peoples, local communities, cities and civil society, including youth and children, in addressing and responding to climate change and highlights the urgent need for multilevel and cooperative action in this regard; 56. 
 
 Notes the adoption of the action plan under the Glasgow work programme on Action for Climate Empowerment by decision 23/CP.27; 
 
57. 
 
 Encourages Parties to increase the full, meaningful and equal participation of women in climate action and to ensure gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation, including by fully implementing the Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan, to raise climate ambition and achieve climate goals; 58. 
 
 Invites Parties to provide support to developing countries for undertaking gender-related action and implementing the gender action plan; 59. 
 
 Recognizes the role of children and youth as agents of change in addressing and responding to climate change and encourages Parties to include children and youth in their processes for designing and implementing climate policy and action, and, as appropriate, to consider including young representatives and negotiators into their national delegations, recognizing the importance of intergenerational equity and maintaining the stability of the climate system for future generations; 
 
60. 
 
 Expresses its appreciation to the Presidency of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties for its leadership in promoting the full, meaningful and equal participation of children and youth, including by co-organizing the first youth-led climate forum (the Sharm el-Sheikh youth climate dialogue), hosting the first children and youth pavilion and appointing the first youth envoy of a Presidency of the Conference of the Parties and encourages future incoming Presidencies of the Conference of the Parties to consider doing the same; 
 
61. 
 
 Expresses its appreciation to the children and youth constituency for co-organizing the Sharm el-Sheikh youth climate dialogue with the Presidency of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties and notes the outcomes of the seventeenth Conference of Youth, organized by the constituency and held in Sharm el-Sheikh in November 2022; 
 
62. 
 
 Encourages Parties and non-Party stakeholders to engage actively in the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action; 
 
63. 
 
 Welcomes the leadership of the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties and the high-level champions, in particular in the context of the Sharm el-Sheikh Adaptation Agenda and the Breakthrough Agenda, and the collaboration between Parties and non-Party stakeholders, and emphasizes the need for continued acceleration and collaboration; 64. 
 
 Welcomes the recommendations of the High-Level Expert Group on the Net-Zero Emissions Commitments of Non-State Entities, launched by the United Nations Secretary-General in March 2022, which are designed to enhance transparency and accountability related to, and progress in achieving, the climate pledges of businesses, investors, cities and regions; 
 
65. 
 
 Invites the secretariat to ensure greater accountability of voluntary initiatives through the Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action platform;22 
 
66. 
 
 Welcomes the convening of five regional forums led by the President of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties and the high-level champions,  
collaboration with the United Nations Regional Economic Commissions, on initiatives for financing climate action and the Sustainable Development Goals. 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 20 November 2022 
 
 
 

 
10 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 2/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Funding arrangements for responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage1 
 
 The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, 
 
 
 
 Recalling the Convention and the Paris Agreement, 
 
 Noting the increasing urgency of enhancing efforts to avert, minimize and address loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in the light of continued global warming and its significant impacts on vulnerable populations and the ecosystems on which they depend, as illustrated by the findings in relevant recent scientific reports, including the contributions of Working Groups I2 and II3 to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
 
 Also noting that keeping the global average temperature rise to below 1.5 °C will be essential to limiting future loss and damage and expressing alarm that the contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in line with other best available science, concluded that the gravity, scope and frequency of loss and damage will continue to increase with every additional fraction of a degree of temperature increase, 
 
 Recalling previous work under the UNFCCC as part of the consideration of the current state of finance for addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change,4 
 
 Acknowledging the many institutions and stakeholders involved in financing activities for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including extreme weather events and slow onset events, Welcoming related initiatives announced at the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties, including, but not limited to, the Global Shield against Climate Risks and the United Nations Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All, Acknowledging that existing funding arrangements fall short of responding to current and future impacts of climate change and are not sufficient to address the existing funding gaps related to providing action and support in responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, 
 
 Recalling paragraphs 7(b) and 2 of the reports on these sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris 1 This item and the outcomes thereof are without prejudice to the consideration of similar issues in the future. 
 
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2021. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. V Masson-Delmotte, P Zhai, A Pirani, et al. (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/. 
 
3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. H Pörtner, D Roberts, M Tignor, et al. (eds.). 
 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/. 
 
4 Including but not limited to the 2016 Forum of the Standing Committee of Finance on financial instruments that address the risks of loss and damage, a technical paper on the elaboration of the sources of and modalities for accessing financial support for addressing loss and damage (FCCC/TP/2019/1), the Suva expert dialogue on loss and damage associated with climate change impacts, and the 1st Glasgow Dialogue, to discuss funding arrangements for activities to avert, minimize and address loss and damage. 
 

 
11 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
Agreement respectively, in relation to the adoption of agenda sub-item 8(f), “Matters relating to finance: matters relating to funding arrangements responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage”, 
 
1. 
 
 Acknowledge the urgent and immediate need for new, additional, predictable and adequate financial resources to assist developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change in responding to economic and non-economic loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including extreme weather events and slow onset events, especially in the context of ongoing and ex post (including rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction) action; 
 
2. 
 
 Decide to establish new funding arrangements for assisting developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, in responding to loss and damage, including with a focus on addressing loss and damage by providing and assisting in mobilizing new and additional resources, and that these new arrangements complement and include sources, funds, processes and initiatives under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement; 
 
3. 
 
 Also decide, in the context of establishing the new funding arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 above, to establish a fund for responding to loss and damage whose mandate includes a focus on addressing loss and damage; 
 
4. 
 
 Establish a transitional committee on the operationalization of the new funding arrangements for responding to loss and damage and the fund established in paragraph 3 
 
above (hereinafter referred to as the Transitional Committee), in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex, to make recommendations based on, inter alia, elements for operationalization included in paragraph 5 below, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-eighth session (November–December 2023) and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fifth session (November–December 2023) with a view to operationalizing the funding arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 above, including the fund referred to in paragraph 3 
 
above; 
 
5. 
 
 Agree that the recommendations to operationalize the funding arrangements and the fund referred to in paragraphs 2–3 above respectively shall consider, inter alia: (a) 
 
Establishing institutional arrangements, modalities, structure, governance and terms of reference for the fund referred to in paragraph 3 above; (b) 
 
Defining the elements of the new funding arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 above; 
 
(c) 
 
Identifying and expanding sources of funding; 
 
(d) 
 
Ensuring coordination and complementarity with existing funding arrangements; 
 
6. 
 
 Decide that the Transitional Committee referred to in paragraph 4 above will be informed by the following, inter alia: 
 
(a) 
 
The current landscape of institutions, including global, regional and national, that are funding activities related to addressing loss and damage, and ways in which coherence, coordination and synergies among them can be enhanced; (b) 
 
The gaps within that current landscape, including the types of gap, such as relating to speed, eligibility, adequacy and access to finance, noting that these may vary depending on the challenge, such as climate-related emergencies, sea level rise, displacement, relocation, migration, insufficient climate information and data, or the need for climate-resilient reconstruction and recovery; 
 
(c) 
 
The priority gaps for which solutions should be explored; (d) 
 
The most effective ways in which to address the gaps, especially for the most vulnerable populations and the ecosystems on which they depend; 12 
 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
(e) 
 
Potential sources of funding, recognizing the need for support from a wide variety of sources, including innovative sources; 
 
7. 
 
 Also decide to undertake the following activities for informing the recommendations referred to in paragraphs 4–5 above: 
 
(a) 
 
Request the secretariat to conduct two workshops in 2023, with the participation of a diversity of institutions, relevant to addressing loss and damage associated with climate change impacts; 
 
(b) 
 
Request the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on existing funding arrangements and innovative sources relevant to addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
(c) 
 
Invite Parties and relevant organizations to submit via the submission portal5 
 
by 15 February 2023 views on topics for and the structure of the 2nd Glasgow Dialogue6 and the workshops referred to in paragraph 7(a) above; 
 
(d) 
 
Invite United Nations agencies, intergovernmental organizations, and bilateral, multilateral and international financial institutions to submit inputs on how they might enhance access to and/or the speed, scope and scale of availability of finance for activities relevant to addressing loss and damage, including potential limitations and barriers and options for addressing them; 
 
8. 
 
 Further decide that the activities and considerations referred to in this decision will be undertaken taking into account the discussions at the 2nd and 3rd Glasgow Dialogues, to take place at the fifty-eighth (June 2023) and sixtieth (June 2024) sessions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation respectively; 
 
9. 
 
 Decide that the 2nd and 3rd Glasgow Dialogues will build on the 1st Glasgow Dialogue, held at the fifty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, and that the 2nd Dialogue shall focus on the operationalization of the new funding arrangements established in paragraph 2 above and the fund established in paragraph 3 above as well as on maximizing support from existing funding arrangements relevant for, inter alia, responding to economic and non-economic losses, slow onset events and extreme weather events, and that they will inform the work of the Transitional Committee; 
 
10. 
 
 Request the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to provide a summary report on each Glasgow Dialogue no later than four weeks thereafter; 11. 
 
 Invite the United Nations Secretary-General to convene the principals of international financial institutions and other relevant entities with a view to identifying the most effective ways to provide funding to respond to needs related to addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
12. 
 
 Also invite international financial institutions to consider, at the 2023 Spring Meetings of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund, the potential for such institutions to contribute to funding arrangements, including new and innovative approaches, responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 13. 
 
 Reiterate decision 1/CMA.3, paragraph 64, in which developed country Parties, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, United Nations entities and intergovernmental organizations and other bilateral and multilateral institutions, including non-governmental organizations and private sources, are urged to provide enhanced and additional support for activities addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 14. 
 
 Request the President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session, in collaboration with the incoming President of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-eighth session, to convene ministerial consultations prior to the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement to advance consideration and understanding of a possible outcome on this matter at that session; 
 
5 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/submissionsstaging/Pages/Home.aspx. 
 
6 See decision 1/CMA.3, para. 73. 
 

 
13 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
15. 
 
 Also request the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the outcomes of the activities and deliverables referred to in paragraphs 7(b), 11, 12 and 14 above to inform the recommendations to be developed by the Transitional Committee; 16. 
 
 Decide that the secretariat shall support and facilitate the work of the Transitional Committee; 
 
17. 
 
 Take note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 2–16 above; 18. 
 
 Request that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources. 
 

 
14 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 

 
 
 
 Decision 3/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling Article 2 of the Convention, 
 
 Also recalling decision 2/CP.17, paragraphs 75–77, Further recalling decision 4/CP.23, 
 
 Recognizing the fundamental priority of safeguarding food security and ending hunger, and the particular vulnerabilities of food production systems to the adverse impacts of climate change, 
 
 Also recognizing that the impact of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic and other global challenges has exposed the limited resilience of global food systems to the adverse impacts of climate change and the limited progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and ensuring food security, 
 
 Acknowledging that the increasing frequency of extreme weather events has exposed millions of people, especially small-scale farmers, those from low-income households, indigenous peoples, women and youth in developing countries, to acute food and water insecurity and that, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, more than 800 million people face hunger every year,1 a figure set to increase as a consequence of climate change, 
 
 Highlighting that farmers, including smallholders and pastoralists, are stewards of the land and are inclined to apply sustainable land management approaches, and acknowledging that their vulnerability to climate change presents a challenge in fulfilling this important role and that policy responses in agriculture are more likely to succeed if they consider the role of farmers as key agents of change, 
 
 Highlighting that each food production system has its own challenges and that solutions must be context-specific and take into account national circumstances, especially if they are to be scaled up, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the progress of and outcomes achieved by the subsidiary bodies in jointly addressing issues related to agriculture2 and the Koronivia road map;3 
 
2. 
 
 Takes note of the following recommendations on the different workshop reports under the Koronivia joint work on agriculture identified and agreed in conclusions of the subsidiary bodies,4 recognizing that related policies and their implementation are context-specific and take into account national circumstances: 
 
(a) 
 
Recognized that information provided during the workshops and in the workshop reports5 and other information provide a mapping of activities and mandates of UNFCCC constituted bodies; 
 
1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural Development, United Nations Children’s Fund, World Food Programme and World Health Organization. 2022. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2022: Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Available at https://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cc0639en. 
 
2 Pursuant to decision 4/CP.23, para. 1. 
 
3 Contained in annex I to documents FCCC/SBI/2018/9 and FCCC/SBSTA/2018/4. 
 
4 FCCC/SBI/2019/9, para. 44, FCCC/SBSTA/2019/2, para. 42, FCCC/SBI/2019/20, paras. 28–29, FCCC/SBSTA/2019/5, paras. 16–17, FCCC/SBI/2021/16, paras. 46–49, FCCC/SBSTA/2021/3, paras. 47–50, FCCC/SBI/2022/10, paras. 56–57, and FCCC/SBSTA/2022/6, paras. 27–28. 
 
5 FCCC/SB/2019/INF.1, FCCC/SB/2019/1, FCCC/SB/2019/2, FCCC/SB/2020/1, FCCC/SB/2021/1, FCCC/SB/2021/2, and FCCC/SB/2021/3 and Add.1. 
 

 
16 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
(b) 
 
Encouraged the continued involvement of constituted bodies and financing entities in the Koronivia joint work on agriculture, highlighting the potential for creating interlinkages that lead to enhanced action and improvements in implementation; (c) 
 
Recognized that some modalities for implementation already exist and invited Parties to scale up implementation; 
 
(d) 
 
Also recognized the importance of the continued involvement of scientific and technical knowledge in transforming the agriculture sector, enabling conditions, the crucial role of farmers, youth, local communities and indigenous peoples, including gender considerations, and of meeting the needs of farmers and food systems; (e) 
 
Welcomed the presentation made by the Green Climate Fund on its work on issues relating to agriculture, and also welcomed the subsequent clarification by the secretariat of the process for Parties to submit their views to the Standing Committee on Finance, in line with existing procedures, on elements to be taken into account in developing guidance for the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism; (f) 
 
Recognized that various tools are available for assessing and monitoring adaptation and its co-benefits, but existing tools could benefit from further adjustment and new tools could be developed for country-specific circumstances, while taking into consideration the importance of sharing best practices among countries and other stakeholders and the important role of science, technology and capacity-building in facilitating data collection and adaptation assessment; (g) 
 
Also recognized that issues relating to soil carbon, soil health and soil fertility, as well as sustainable soil and integrated water management, are context-specific and, taking into account countries’ circumstances, should be dealt with in a holistic and inclusive manner to realize the full potential of increased productivity in contributing to food security, adaptation and adaptation co-benefits as well as enhancing carbon sinks; (h) 
 
Further recognized that soil and nutrient management practices and the optimal use of nutrients, including organic fertilizer and enhanced manure management, lie at the core of climate-resilient, sustainable food production systems and can contribute to global food security; 
 
(i) 
 
Recognized that livestock management systems are very vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and that sustainably managed livestock systems have high adaptive capacity and resilience to climate change while playing broad roles in safeguarding food and nutrition security, livelihoods, sustainability, nutrient cycling and carbon management; 
 
(j) 
 
Noted that improving sustainable production and animal health, aiming to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the livestock sector while enhancing sinks on pasture and grazing land, can contribute to achieving long-term climate objectives, taking into account different systems and national circumstances; 
 
(k) 
 
Recognized that socioeconomic and food security dimensions are critical when dealing with climate change in agriculture and food systems; (l) 
 
Also recognized the fundamental priority of safeguarding food security and ending hunger by designing sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural systems, applying a systemic approach in line with the long-term global climate objectives, further recognizing the importance of long-term investment in agriculture focused on this objective; (m) 
 
Noted the importance of scaling up support to enhance action on safeguarding food and nutrition security and ending hunger, aiming for inclusive, sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural systems, taking into consideration the vulnerability of agriculture to the impacts of climate change; 
 
(n) 
 
Recognized the need to improve the enabling environment for mobilizing resources for implementing action at the local, national and international level; (o) 
 
Noted the importance of considering sustainable land and water management for agriculture in a systemic and integrated manner informed by scientific, local and indigenous knowledge implemented in a participatory and inclusive manner and taking into 17  
consideration regional, national and local circumstances to deliver a range of multiple benefits, where applicable, such as adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and mitigation, to ensure food security and nutrition; 
 
(p) 
 
Highlighted ‘no regrets’ options, such as those mentioned in the workshop reports and avoiding maladaptation; 
 
(q) 
 
Noted that implementing sustainable approaches can render multiple benefits for society, such as improved water quality, higher biodiversity and increased soil organic matter, and also noted the value of incorporating diversification, recycling and efficiency, and supporting synergies within agricultural systems; 
 
(r) 
 
Recognized the importance of increased access to international resources, such as finance, capacity-building and technology development and transfer, from a variety of sources to implement these approaches; 
 
(s) 
 
Also recognized the need to scale up the implementation of best practices, innovations and technologies that increase resilience and sustainable production in agricultural systems according to national circumstances in an inclusive and participatory way that includes farmers, pastoralists, indigenous peoples, local and vulnerable communities, women and youth and is informed by scientific, local and indigenous knowledge; 
 
(t) 
 
Noted that many approaches with high potential for adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and mitigation relate to land and food systems, such as conserving and restoring ecosystems, improving sustainability of agricultural practices and reducing food loss and waste from sustainable food systems, and have significant positive direct and indirect links with biodiversity and ecosystem services, food security and the Sustainable Development Goals; 
 
(u) 
 
Recognized that scaling up implementation requires enhanced knowledge-sharing on best practices, access to finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity-building; 
 
(v) 
 
Also recognized that innovative policy and social approaches to scaling up, such as institutional arrangements, partnerships and farmers’ empowerment, can incentivize implementation and support an enabling environment for scaling up best practices; (w) 
 
Noted that successful policy innovations can include extension services and farmers’ self-organization; 
 
3. 
 
 Recognizes that workshops under the Koronivia joint work on agriculture provide useful information on the latest agricultural research, national circumstances, the realities faced by farmers, challenges and opportunities relating to agricultural research and development, and ways of mobilizing climate action in the area of agriculture and food security, and have thus been crucial for building a common understanding of relevant challenges and opportunities; 
 
4. 
 
 Recalls that the Koronivia road map, workshops under the Koronivia joint work on agriculture and reports thereon, as well as the conclusions of the subsidiary bodies on those reports, have improved awareness of and knowledge on the impacts of climate change on agriculture, helped to focus the work of institutions, organizations and stakeholders working on matters of agriculture and climate change and led to new activities and initiatives in this area; 
 
5. 
 
 Welcomes the participation of representatives of constituted bodies, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism,6 the Adaptation Fund, the Special Climate Change Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and observer organizations in workshops under the Koronivia joint work on agriculture; 
 
6. 
 
 Acknowledges that the Koronivia joint work on agriculture has highlighted the need to identify modalities for addressing challenges in and exploring opportunities for accessing existing means of implementation; 
 
6 The Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund. 
 

 
18 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
7. 
 
 Also acknowledges the need to strengthen work under relevant institutional arrangements under the Convention in order to consolidate and advance work on addressing issues related to agriculture; 
 
8. 
 
 Further acknowledges that the Koronivia joint work on agriculture has highlighted the need for enhanced climate action on agriculture and food security, and for enhanced coordination with and among actors outside the UNFCCC; 9. 
 
 Emphasizes the urgent need to scale up action and support with regard to capacity-building, access to finance, and technology development and transfer with a view to enhancing the adaptive capacity and resilience and reducing the vulnerability of farmers and other vulnerable groups, especially small-scale farmers, women and youth, in relation to climate change; 
 
10. 
 
 Urges Parties, relevant organizations and other groups to increase their efforts in relation to promoting sustainable agriculture, including by strengthening the role of indigenous peoples and local communities, and particularly women and youth, with a view to eradicating hunger and poverty while ensuring food security; 11. 
 
 Underscores the importance of constituted bodies and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism taking into account the conclusions of the subsidiary bodies referred to in paragraph 2 above in implementing their actions and workplans, according to their mandates; 
 
12. 
 
 Invites Parties to consider policies, actions and measures relevant to implementing the conclusions referred to in paragraph 2 above; 
 
13. 
 
 Also invites the current and future Presidencies of the Conference of the Parties, high-level champions and other actors, when promoting climate initiatives, to take into account the conclusions referred to in paragraph 2 above in considering issues related to agriculture, and to promote the sharing of information and knowledge on best practices and means of implementation; 
 
14. 
 
 Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to establish the four-year Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security, including implementation of the outcomes of the Koronivia joint work on agriculture and previous activities addressing issues related to agriculture,7 as well as future topics, recognizing that solutions are context-specific and take into account national circumstances, with the following objectives: 
 
(a) 
 
Promoting a holistic approach to addressing issues related to agriculture and food security, taking into consideration regional, national and local circumstances, in order to deliver a range of multiple benefits, where applicable, such as adaptation, adaptation co-benefits and mitigation, recognizing that adaptation is a priority for vulnerable groups, including women, indigenous peoples and small-scale farmers; (b) 
 
Enhancing coherence, synergies, coordination, communication and interaction between Parties, constituted bodies and workstreams, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund in order to facilitate the implementation of action to address issues related to agriculture and food security; 
 
(c) 
 
Promoting synergies and strengthening engagement, collaboration and partnerships among national, regional and international organizations and other relevant stakeholders, as well as under relevant processes and initiatives, in order to enhance the implementation of climate action to address issues related to agriculture and food security; (d) 
 
Providing support and technical advice to Parties, constituted bodies and the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism on climate action to address issues related to 7 See documents FCCC/SBSTA/2014/INF.2, FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.6, FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.7, FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.5 and FCCC/SBSTA/2016/INF.6. 
 

 
19 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
agriculture and food security, respecting the Party-driven approach and in accordance with their respective procedures and mandates; 
 
(e) 
 
Enhancing research and development on issues related to agriculture and food security and consolidating and sharing related scientific, technological and other information, knowledge (including local and indigenous knowledge), experience, innovations and best practices; 
 
(f) 
 
Evaluating progress in implementing and cooperating on climate action to address issues related to agriculture and food security; (g) 
 
Sharing information and knowledge on developing and implementing national policies, plans and strategies related to climate change, while recognizing country-specific needs and contexts; 
 
15. 
 
 Also requests the secretariat to support the joint work referred to in paragraph 14 
 
above by: 
 
(a) 
 
Preparing an annual synthesis report on the work undertaken by constituted bodies and financial and other entities under the Convention, as well as by relevant international organizations, on activities related to the joint work referred to in paragraph 14 
 
above; 
 
(b) 
 
Holding in-session workshops in hybrid format, facilitating both virtual and in-person participation, on agreed topics related to agriculture and food security at the first regular sessions of the subsidiary bodies each year and inviting representatives of the constituted bodies under the Convention, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund and observers to them; 
 
16. 
 
 Decides to establish the Sharm el-Sheikh online portal under the joint work referred to in paragraph 14 above for sharing information on projects, initiatives and policies for increasing opportunities for implementation of climate action to address issues related to agriculture and food security; 
 
17. 
 
 Invites Parties and observers to submit by 27 March 2023 via the submission portal8 
 
views on the elements of the joint work referred to in paragraphs 14–15 above, including views on topics for the workshops referred to in paragraph 15(b) above, for consideration by the subsidiary bodies at their fifty-eighth sessions (June 2023); 18. 
 
 Also invites Parties and observers to submit by 27 March 2023 via the submission portal views on the operationalization of the portal referred to in paragraph 16 above for consideration by the subsidiary bodies at their fifty-eighth sessions; 19. 
 
 Further invites Parties, United Nations organizations and other relevant institutions, agencies and entities, the research community, the private sector, civil society and farmers organizations, among others and as appropriate, to strengthen cooperation, collaboration and partnerships in relation to the joint work referred to in paragraph 14 above, including with a view to fighting hunger on the ground, addressing in particular the needs of women, children, youth, indigenous peoples and local communities; 
 
20. 
 
 Requests the subsidiary bodies to report to the Conference of the Parties at its thirty-first session (2026) on the progress and outcomes of the joint work referred to in paragraph 14 above; 
 
21. 
 
 Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraph 15 above; 
 
22. 
 
 Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources. 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 20 November 2022 
 
8 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/submissionsstaging/Pages/Home.aspx. 
 

 
20 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 4/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Revision of the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 18/CP.22, 1/CP.24 and 18/CMA.1, 1. 
 
 Decides that the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review, contained in annex II to decision 2/CP.17, shall continue to be used for conducting the technical review and multilateral assessment for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, taking into account decision 1/CP.24, paragraphs 39, 41 and 44; 2. 
 
 Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider undertaking no later than at its first session of 2028, as appropriate, the review of the modalities and procedures for international assessment and review on the basis of experience of reporting, technical expert review and multilateral assessment. 
 
 9th plenary meeting 
 
 17 November 2022 
 

 
21 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 5/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Revision of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions, 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 1/CP.24 and 18/CMA.1, 1. 
 
 Decides that the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis, contained in annex IV to decision 2/CP.17, shall continue to be used for conducting the technical analysis and facilitative sharing of views for Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention, taking into account decision 1/CP.24, paragraphs 39, 41 and 44; 2. 
 
 Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider undertaking no later than at its first session of 2028, as appropriate, the review of the modalities and guidelines for international consultation and analysis on the basis of experience of reporting, technical analysis and facilitative sharing of views. 
 
 9th plenary meeting 
 
 17 November 2022 
 

 
22 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 6/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 10, paragraph 2, and Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention, 
 
 Also recalling decisions 24/CP.19 and 1/CP.24, in particular paragraph 42, Further recalling decisions 18/CMA.1 and 5/CMA.3, 
 
1. 
 
 Decides that, when reporting their annual greenhouse gas inventories under the Convention in accordance with the “Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual greenhouse gas inventories” for the 2024 submission onward, Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are not Parties to the Paris Agreement that are using an approach to reporting emissions and removals from harvested wood products other than the production approach1 shall also provide supplementary information on emissions and removals from harvested wood products estimated using the production approach, either in their national inventory report, or as per paragraph 44 of decision 1/CP.24 and using the common reporting tables set out in annex I to decision 5/CMA.3; 2. 
 
 Also decides that the global warming potential values, excluding the value for fossil methane used by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks in their reporting under the Convention shall be those based on the effects of greenhouse gases over a 100-year time horizon listed in table 8.A.1 of the contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change2 
 
and that these values shall be applied by no later than 31 December 2024; 3. 
 
 Further decides that Parties included in Annex I to the Convention may in addition also use other metrics (e.g. global temperature potential) to report supplemental information on aggregate emissions and removals of greenhouse gases, expressed in carbon dioxide equivalence; in such cases, they shall provide in their national inventory report information on the values of the metrics used and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change assessment report from which they were sourced; 
 
4. 
 
 Requests the secretariat to enable, by 30 January 2023, an option to the current CRF 
 
Reporter for generating common reporting format tables using the 100-year time-horizon global warming potential values, excluding the value for fossil methane, listed in table 8.A.1 
 
in the contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; 
 
5. 
 
 Notes that the final version of the reporting tool for electronic reporting of the common reporting tables referred to in decision 5/CMA.3, paragraph 8, is not expected to be available for use until 30 June 2024; 
 
6. 
 
 Decides to change the deadline for the submission by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are Parties to the Paris Agreement of their annual greenhouse gas inventories due in 2024 to 31 December 2024; 
 
1 As set out in vol. 4, chap. 12, of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2006 IPCC 
 
 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
 
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. TF Stocker, D Qin, G-K Plattner, et al. (eds.). Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. Available at http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1. 
 

 
23 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
7. 
 
 Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to revisit this matter at its sixty-first session (November 2024) should there be any unplanned delays in the development of the tool referred to in paragraph 5 above. 
 
 9th plenary meeting 
 
 17 November 2022 
 

 
24 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 7/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Common metrics used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 10, paragraph 2, and Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention, 
 
 Also recalling decisions 3/CP.1, 4/CP.1, 9/CP.2, 10/CP.2, 12/CP.4, 3/CP.5, 4/CP.5, 8/CP.5, 32/CP.7, 17/CP.8, 18/CP.8, 14/CP.11, 2/CP.17, 15/CP.17, 19/CP.18, 24/CP.19, 1/CP.21, 1/CP.24, 6/CP.25, 18/CMA.1 and 5/CMA.3, 
 
1. 
 
 Decides that, until it adopts a further decision on the matter, the global warming potential values used by Parties in their reporting under the Convention to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks shall be based on the effects of greenhouse gases over a 100-year time-horizon as listed in table 8.A.1 in appendix 8.A to the contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,1 excluding the value for fossil methane; 
 
2. 
 
 Also decides that all Parties shall start using the global warming potential values referred to in paragraph 1 above no later than on 31 December 2024 for the purpose of meeting their reporting requirements under the Convention; 3. 
 
 Further decides to consider the need to update the common metric values referred to in this decision no later than in 2028, concurrently with the review of the modalities, procedures and guidelines contained in the annex to decision 18/CMA.1; 4. 
 
 Decides that each Party to the Convention may in addition also use other metrics (e.g. 
 
global temperature potential) to report supplemental information on aggregate greenhouse gas emissions and removals, expressed in carbon dioxide equivalent, and that in such case the Party shall provide in its reporting under the Convention information on the values of the other metrics used and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change assessment report from which they were sourced. 
 
 9th plenary meeting 
 
 17 November 2022 
 
1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. TF Stocker, D Qin, G-K Plattner, et al. (eds.). Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. Available at http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1. 
 

 
25 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 8/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Report of the Adaptation Committee for 2022 and review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the 
 

 
Adaptation Committee 
The Conference of the Parties 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the work of the Adaptation Committee in 2022 and takes note of the report of the Adaptation Committee covering its work between September 2021 and September 2022, contained in document FCCC/SB/2022/5 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and Add. 2, and the recommendations therein; 
 
2. 
 
 Also takes note of the progress of the Adaptation Committee in improving its outreach and communication efforts and encourages the Committee to make further use of platforms for outreach, communication in languages other than English and the organization of regional events and knowledge dialogues as ways to improve the dissemination, understanding and use of its knowledge products by organizations and practitioners within and outside the UNFCCC process and in all geographical regions; 
 
3. 
 
 Notes that considerations of the review of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee could not be completed at this session and will therefore continue at the fifty-eighth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (June 2023); 4. 
 
 Encourages Parties to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the flexible workplan of the Adaptation Committee for 2022–2024.1 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 20 November 2022 
 
1 FCCC/SB/2021/6, annex. 
 

 
26 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 9/CP.27 
 
 
 

 
 National adaptation plans 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 3/CP.17, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 18/CP.19, 3/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 4/CP.21, 6/CP.22, 8/CP.24, 7/CP.25, 1/CP.26 and 1/CMA.3, 1. 
 
 Welcomes the reports for 2020–2022 on progress in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans1 and takes note of other relevant documents;2 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the information provided by the Adaptation Committee3 and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group4 on gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and progress in implementing national adaptation plans;5 
 
3. 
 
 Also welcomes the national adaptation plans submitted in 2021–2022 by Cabo Verde, the Central African Republic, Chad, Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Madagascar, Niger and Sierra Leone on NAP Central,6 which brings the total number of countries with submitted national adaptation plans to 40, and the sectoral national adaptation plans submitted by other Parties;7 
 
4. 
 
 Expresses concern at the large number of countries that have not been able to submit their first national adaptation plan and in this respect notes the challenges, complexities and delays experienced by developing country Parties in accessing funding and support from the Green Climate Fund for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans, particularly in relation to the submission and review of proposals for funding; 5. 
 
 Invites the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in line with their mandates, to continue formulating recommendations on ways to facilitate the mobilization of support for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans with a view to addressing the challenges referred to in paragraph 4 above and to submit the recommendations to the Standing Committee on Finance for consideration; 6. 
 
 Welcomes the work of the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group on gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, including the needs referred to in annex II to document FCCC/SBI/2019/5,8 
 
and their work on ways to assist with the implementation of national adaptation plans, as requested by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its forty-seventh session;9 
 
7. 
 
 Requests the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to continue to identify the priority gaps and needs of developing countries related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, the progress of each country in this process and any obstacles and challenges faced; 1 FCCC/SBI/2020/INF.13/Rev.1, FCCC/SBI/2021/INF.7 and FCCC/SBI/2022/19. 
 
2 The reports of the Adaptation Committee for 2019–2022, available at 
 
https://unfccc.int/topics/resilience/resources/documents-of-the-adaptation-committee, and the meeting reports of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group for 2019–2022, available at 
 
https://unfccc.int/topics/resilience/resources/documents-on-the-ldc-expert-group. 
 
3 See documents FCCC/SB/2019/3, paras. 54–56, and FCCC/SB/2020/2, para. 67. 
 
4 See documents FCCC/SBI/2019/16, chap. III.G and annex I; FCCC/SBI/2020/6, chap. IV.F and annex II; FCCC/SBI/2020/14, chap. III.H and annex II; FCCC/SBI/2021/6, chap. IV.F; and FCCC/SBI/2021/13, chap. III.F. 
 
5 FCCC/SBI/2022/6, chap. IV.C.2. 
 
6 Available at https://napcentral.org/submitted-naps. 
 
7 Available at https://napcentral.org/sectoral-naps. 
 
8 In response to decision 8/CP.24, paras. 17–18, and decision 7/CP.25, para. 3. 
 
9 FCCC/SBI/2017/19, para. 73. 
 

 
27 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
8. 
 
 Also requests the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to enhance their work in addressing the priority gaps and needs, obstacles and challenges identified through their work referred to in paragraph 5 above and to include information thereon in their reports; 
 
9. 
 
 Further requests the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to organize training for developing country Parties on addressing identified gaps and needs, which could be held in conjunction with the NAP Expo, the Adaptation Forum or other events outlined in their respective work programmes; 10. 
 
 Invites other UNFCCC constituted bodies and relevant organizations to provide information to the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group on activities that have the aim of addressing gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, including information on the regions and countries in which the constituted bodies and organizations provide support; 11. 
 
 Notes that the technical resources developed and the scientific resources synthesized by the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group can assist developing countries in addressing gaps and needs related to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, including in assessing adaptation needs, applying regional approaches to adaptation planning, promoting linkages between adaptation and development, and strengthening gender considerations in national adaptation plans; 12. 
 
 Also notes that the best available science, as well as traditional, indigenous and local knowledge, as appropriate, should be taken into account in addressing the priority gaps and needs referred to in paragraph 7 above and in enhancing the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans for developing countries; 13. 
 
 Notes with serious concern the findings on adaptation gaps in the contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;10 
 
14. 
 
 Recognizes that long-term planning and accelerated implementation of adaptation actions, particularly in the next decade, is important for closing adaptation gaps; 15. 
 
 Also recognizes that maladaptation can be avoided through flexible, multisectoral, inclusive and long-term planning and implementation of adaptation actions that benefit many sectors and systems; 
 
16. 
 
 Takes note of the support available to developing country Parties for formulating and implementing national adaptation plans and recognizes the importance of scaling up this support; 
 
17. 
 
 Encourages relevant organizations to continue coordinating support related to the process to formulate, update and implement national adaptation plans and to continue sharing lessons learned; 
 
18. 
 
 Notes that the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans is crucial to informing the assessment of progress towards achieving the global goal on adaptation, including through the Glasgow–Sharm el-Sheikh work programme on the global goal on adaptation and the global stocktake. 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 20 November 2022 
 
10 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. H Pörtner, D Roberts, M Tignor, et al. (eds.). 
 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2. 
 

 
28 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 10/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Matters relating to the least developed countries The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, Recalling decisions 5/CP.7, 29/CP.7, 7/CP.9, 4/CP.10, 4/CP.11, 8/CP.13, 6/CP.16, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 3/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 19/CP.21, 16/CP.24, 7/CP.25, 15/CP.26, 11/CMA.1 
 
and 19/CMA.1, 
 
 Having considered the report on the 42nd meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group,1 
 
 Underscoring the importance of continued implementation by the Green Climate Fund of the mandate given to it in decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 46, 1. 
 
 Welcome the progress of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group in implementing its work programme for 2022–2023,2 including its provision of support to the least developed countries for developing project concepts for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities in their national adaptation plans;3 
 
2. 
 
 Also welcome the successful conduct by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group of the national adaptation plan writing workshop for Asia-Pacific least developed countries held in Siem Reap, Cambodia, from 12 to 15 July 2022 and the NAP Expo held in Gaborone, Botswana, from 22 to 26 August 2022; 
 
3. 
 
 Express their appreciation to the Government of Cambodia for hosting the workshop referred to in paragraph 2 above and the Government of Botswana for hosting the 42nd meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and NAP Expo 2022 and express their gratitude to the Government of Ireland for providing financial support for the work of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group; 
 
4. 
 
 Express their appreciation to the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the secretariat for their valuable work in supporting adaptation in the least developed countries; 5. 
 
 Also express their appreciation to the organizations that contributed to designing and conducting the workshop referred to in paragraph 2 above; 6. 
 
 Welcome the progress of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group in developing technical guidelines for the implementation of national adaptation plans4 and note that those guidelines may help to address gaps and needs relating to the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans5 and for informing the design and provision of support for the implementation of national adaptation plans; 
 
7. 
 
 Also note the limited progress of the least developed countries on the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans and the need for enhanced support of the least developed countries to advance the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans; 
 
8. 
 
 Further note that, as at 14 November 2022, 17 of the 46 least developed countries had submitted a national adaptation plan since the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans was established in 2010, and of those 17 least developed countries with a national adaptation plan, 14 had accessed funding for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities identified therein; 
 
1 FCCC/SBI/2022/18. 
 
2 FCCC/SBI/2022/6, annex III. 
 
3 FCCC/SBI/2022/18, paras. 21–23. 
 
4 FCCC/SBI/2022/18, paras. 32–35. 
 
5 See https://unfccc.int/node/210550. 
 

 
29 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
9. 
 
 Reiterate and recall decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 46, and note decision 16/CP.27 in relation to enhancing support to the least developed countries for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans; 
 
10. 
 
 Underscore the importance of developing project pipelines and proposals for implementing adaptation actions associated with the priorities in the national adaptation plans of the least developed countries and encourage relevant organizations, as well as operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, to enhance support to the least developed countries in this regard; 
 
11. 
 
 Note with appreciation the financial pledges, totalling USD 70.6 million, made by the Governments of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Slovenia, Sweden and Switzerland and the government of the Walloon Region of Belgium to the Least Developed Countries Fund and urge additional contributions to the Fund; 12. 
 
 Request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to enhance the support provided to the least developed countries for aligning national adaptation plans and nationally determined contributions; 
 
13. 
 
 Also request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to continue to support the least developed countries in integrating gender considerations into the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans; 
 
14. 
 
 Welcome the development by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group of its draft rules of procedure; 
 
15. 
 
 Adopt the rules of procedure of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group contained in the annex; 
 
16. 
 
 Encourage the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to prioritize the implementation of the elements of its mandate in accordance with the needs of the least developed countries and the availability of resources; 17. 
 
 Invite Parties and relevant organizations to continue to provide resources to support implementation of the work programme of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. 
 

 
30 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 

 
 Decision 11/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
 
 The Conference of the Parties 
 
1. 
 
 Endorses decision 12/CMA.4, on the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, which provides as follows: 
 

2. 
 
 Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its twenty-eighth session (November–December 2023).6 
 
5 It is noted that discussions on the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism did not produce an outcome; this is without prejudice to further consideration of this matter. 
 
6 As footnote 6 above. 
 

 
40 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 


 

 
 
 Decision 12/CP.27 
 
 
 
 Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw 
 
International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts 
 
 
 
 The Conference of the Parties 
 
1. 
 
 Endorses decision 13/CMA.4, on the Report of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts and the report1 of the Executive Committee, which provides as follows: 
 
“1. 
 
 Welcomes: 
 
(a) 
 
The report for 2022 of the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, appreciating the work of the Executive Committee and endorsing the recommendations in the report;2 
 
(b) 
 
The adoption by the Executive Committee of its second five-year rolling workplan, the second plan of action of the technical expert group on comprehensive risk management and the third plan of action of the task force on displacement;3 
 
“2. 
 
 Expresses its appreciation to the organizations and experts that contributed to the progress of the work reported in the document referred to in paragraph 1(a) above, including in relation to: 
 
(a) 
 
The development of the second five-year rolling workplan of the Executive Committee; 
 
(b) 
 
The achievements of the expert groups, technical expert group and task force of the Executive Committee; 
 
(c) 
 
Contribution to the regular meetings of the Executive Committee; (d) 
 
The submission of information pursuant to paragraph 44 of decision 2/CMA.2, and noted in decision 2/CP.25, relevant to the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
“3. 
 
 Encourages the organizations and experts to continue to contribute as referred to in paragraph 2 above; 
 
“4. 
 
 Requests the Executive Committee to continue: 
 
(a) 
 
Exploring further opportunities and modalities for engaging national stakeholders, including loss and damage contact points and national focal points; (b) 
 
Collaborating and enhancing synergies with programmes, bodies and platforms under and outside the Convention and the Paris Agreement; 
 
“5. 
 
 Also requests the Executive Committee, with regard to information relating to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage, to continue collaborating with the Consultative Group of Experts in accordance with the latter’s mandate to provide technical advice and support to developing country Parties for enhancing their institutional and technical capacity to prepare and submit national reports; 
 
“6. 
 
 Further requests the secretariat, in responding to paragraph 11 of decision 19/CMA.3, and endorsed in decision 17/CP.26, to make public the requests it receives 1 FCCC/SB/2022/2 and Add.1–2. 
 
2 As footnote 1 above. 
 
3 Contained in document FCCC/SB/2022/2/Add.2, annexes I–III. 
 

 
48 
FCCC/CP/2022/10/Add.1 
 
for technical assistance and to more actively communicate information on technical assistance available and the ways in which countries may access the technical assistance available, including as articulated by organizations, bodies, networks and experts responding to the invitation in paragraph 44 of decision 2/CMA.2, and noted in decision 2/CP.25, relevant to the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, and to report on progress to the Executive Committee; 
 
“7. 
 
 Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its fifth session (November–December 2023);4 
 
“8. 
 
 Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 1–6 above; 
 
“9. 
 
 Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources.” 
 
2. 
 
 Notes that considerations related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism will continue at its twenty-eighth session (November–December 2023).5 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 20 November 2022 
 
4 It is noted that discussions on the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism did not produce an outcome; this is without prejudice to further consideration of this matter. 
 
5 As footnote 5 above. 
 

 
49 

