 

 

 

 

 
 
 
United Nations 
 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
Distr.: General 
 
8 March 2022 
 
Original: English 
 

 
Conference of the Parties 
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-sixth session, held in Glasgow from 31 October to 
 
13 November 2021 
 

 
Addendum 
Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session 
 
Contents 
 
Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties 
 
 Decision 
 
 Page 
 
1/CP.26 
 
Glasgow Climate Pact ................................................................................................ 
 
2 
 
2/CP.26 
 
Report of the Adaptation Committee (for 2019, 2020 and 2021) .............................. 
 
9 
 
3/CP.26 
 
National adaptation plans ........................................................................................... 
 
10 
 
4/CP.26 
 
Long-term climate finance ......................................................................................... 
 
12 
 
5/CP.26 
 
Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance ............................................ 
 
14 
 
6/CP.26 
 
Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund ............................................................................................. 
 
48 
 
7/CP.26 
 
Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility ............................................................ 
 
51 
 
8/CP.26 
 
Compilation and synthesis of, and summary report on the in-session workshop on, biennial communications of information related to Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement ......................................................................................................... 
 
54 
 
9/CP.26 
 
Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism ................................................................................................................. 
 
55 
 
10/CP.26 
 
Review of the constitution of the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network ................................................................................................... 
 
58 
 
11/CP.26 
 
Second review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network ............................... 
 
61 
 
 
 
GE.22-03273(E) 
 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 1/CP.26 
 
 
 

 
 Glasgow Climate Pact 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.19, 1/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 1/CP.22, 1/CP.23, 1/CP.24 and 1/CP.25, 
 
 
 
 Noting decisions 1/CMP.16 and 1/CMA.3, 
 
 
 
 Recognizing the role of multilateralism and the Convention, including its processes and principles, and the importance of international cooperation in addressing climate change and its impacts, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, 
 
 
 
 Acknowledging the devastating impacts of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic and the importance of ensuring a sustainable, resilient and inclusive global recovery, showing solidarity particularly with developing country Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recognizing the important advances made through the UNFCCC multilateral process since 1994, including in the context of the Convention, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, 
 
 
 
 Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind, Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity, 
 
 
 
 Noting the importance of ensuring the integrity of all ecosystems, including in forests, the ocean and the cryosphere, and the protection of biodiversity, recognized by some cultures as Mother Earth, and also noting the importance for some of the concept of ‘climate justice’, when taking action to address climate change, 
 
 
 
 Expressing appreciation to the Heads of State and Government who participated in the World Leaders Summit in Glasgow and for the increased targets and actions announced and the commitments made to work together and with non-Party stakeholders to accelerate sectoral action by 2030, 
 
 
 
 Recognizing the important role of indigenous peoples, local communities and civil society, including youth and children, in addressing and responding to climate change and highlighting the urgent need for multilevel and cooperative action, 
 
 
 
 Recognizing the interlinked global crises of climate change and biodiversity loss, and the critical role of protecting, conserving and restoring nature and ecosystems in delivering benefits for climate adaptation and mitigation, while ensuring social and environmental safeguards, 
 

 
I. Science and urgency 
1. 
 
 Recognizes the importance of the best available science for effective climate action and policymaking; 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the contribution of Working Group I to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report1 and the recent global and regional reports on the state of the climate from the World Meteorological Organization and invites the 1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2021. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. V Masson-Delmotte, P Zhai, A Pirani, et al. (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/. 
 

 
2 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to present its forthcoming reports to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice in 2022; 
 
3. 
 
 Expresses alarm and utmost concern that human activities have caused around 1.1 °C 
 
of global warming to date and that impacts are already being felt in every region; 4. 
 
 Stresses the urgency of enhancing ambition and action in relation to mitigation adaptation and finance in this critical decade to address gaps between current efforts and pathways in pursuit of the ultimate objective of the Convention and its long-term global goal; II. Adaptation 
 
5. 
 
 Notes with serious concern the findings from the contribution of Working Group I to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report, including that climate and weather extremes and their adverse impacts on people and nature will continue to increase with every additional increment of rising temperatures; 6. 
 
 Emphasizes the urgency of scaling up action and support, including finance, capacity-building and technology transfer, to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change in line with the best available science, taking into account the priorities and needs of developing country Parties; 7. 
 
 Welcomes the national adaptation plans submitted to date, which enhance the understanding and implementation of adaptation actions and priorities; 8. 
 
 Urges Parties to further integrate adaptation into local, national and regional planning; 9. 
 
 Invites the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to present to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session (November 2022) the findings from the contribution of Working Group II to its Sixth Assessment Report, including those relevant to assessing adaptation needs, and calls upon the research community to further the understanding of global, regional and local impacts of climate change, response options and adaptation needs; 
 

 
III. Adaptation finance 
10. Notes with concern that the current provision of climate finance for adaptation remains insufficient to respond to worsening climate change impacts in developing country Parties; 
 
11. Urges developed country Parties to urgently and significantly scale up their provision of climate finance, technology transfer and capacity-building for adaptation so as to respond to the needs of developing country Parties as part of a global effort, including for the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans; 
 
12. Recognizes the importance of the adequacy and predictability of adaptation finance, including the value of the Adaptation Fund in delivering dedicated support for adaptation; 13. Welcomes the recent pledges made by many developed country Parties to increase their provision of climate finance to support adaptation in developing country Parties in response to their growing needs, including contributions made to the Adaptation Fund and the Least Developed Countries Fund, which represent significant progress compared with previous efforts; 
 
14. Calls upon multilateral development banks, other financial institutions and the private sector to enhance finance mobilization in order to deliver the scale of resources needed to achieve climate plans, particularly for adaptation, and encourages Parties to continue to explore innovative approaches and instruments for mobilizing finance for adaptation from private sources; 
 

 
3 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 

 
IV. Mitigation 
15. Reaffirms the long-term global goal to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change; 
 
16. Recognizes that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at the temperature increase of 1.5 °C compared with 2 °C and resolves to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C; 
 
17. Recognizes that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C requires rapid, deep and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions, including reducing global carbon dioxide emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 relative to the 2010 level and to net zero around mid-century as well as deep reductions in other greenhouse gases; 
 
18. Also recognizes that this requires accelerated action in this critical decade, on the basis of the best available scientific knowledge and equity, reflecting common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty; 
 
19. Invites Parties to consider further actions to reduce by 2030 non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions, including methane; 
 
20. Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies, and the adoption of policies, to transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the deployment of clean power generation and energy efficiency measures, including accelerating efforts towards the phasedown of unabated coal power and phase-out of inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, while providing targeted support to the poorest and most vulnerable in line with national circumstances and recognizing the need for support towards a just transition; 
 
21. Emphasizes the importance of protecting, conserving and restoring nature and ecosystems, including forests and other terrestrial and marine ecosystems, to achieve the long-term global goal of the Convention by acting as sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases and protecting biodiversity, while ensuring social and environmental safeguards; V. Finance, technology transfer and capacity-building for 
 

 
mitigation and adaptation 
22. Urges developed country Parties to provide enhanced support, including through financial resources, technology transfer and capacity-building, to assist developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation, in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention, and encourages other Parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily; 
 
23. Notes with concern the growing needs of developing country Parties, in particular due to the increasing impacts of climate change and increased indebtedness as a consequence of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic; 
 
24. Welcomes the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement2 and the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows3 by the Standing Committee on Finance; 
 
25. Emphasizes the need to mobilize climate finance from all sources to reach the level needed to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement, including significantly increasing support for developing country Parties, beyond USD 100 billion per year; 2 See document FCCC/CP/2021/10/Add.2–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7/Add.2. 
 
3 See document FCCC/CP/2021/10/Add.1–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7/Add.1. 
 

 
4 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
26. Notes with deep regret that the goal of developed country Parties to mobilize jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation has not yet been met and welcomes the increased pledges made by many developed country Parties and the Climate Finance Delivery Plan: Meeting the US$100 Billion Goal4 and the collective actions contained therein; 27. Urges developed country Parties to fully deliver on the USD 100 billion goal urgently and through to 2025 and emphasizes the importance of transparency in the implementation of their pledges; 
 
28. Urges the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, multilateral development banks and other financial institutions to further scale up investments in climate action and calls for a continued increase in the scale and effectiveness of climate finance from all sources globally, including grants and other highly concessional forms of finance; 29. Re-emphasizes the need for scaled-up financial resources to take into account the needs of those countries particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and in this regard encourages relevant multilateral institutions to consider how climate vulnerabilities should be reflected in the provision and mobilization of concessional financial resources and other forms of support, including special drawing rights; 
 
30. Emphasizes the challenges faced by many developing country Parties in accessing finance and encourages further efforts to enhance access to finance, including by the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism; 
 
31. Notes the specific concerns raised with regard to eligibility and ability to access concessional forms of climate finance and re-emphasizes the importance of the provision of scaled-up financial resources, taking into account the needs of developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change; 32. Encourages relevant providers of financial support to consider how vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change could be reflected in the provision and mobilization of concessional financial resources and how they could simplify and enhance access to finance; 33. Acknowledges the progress made on capacity-building, particularly in relation to enhancing the coherence and coordination of capacity-building activities towards the implementation of the Convention and the Paris Agreement; 
 
34. Recognizes the need to continue supporting developing country Parties in identifying and addressing both current and emerging capacity-building gaps and needs, and to catalyse climate action and solutions to respond; 
 
35. Welcomes the joint annual reports of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2020 and 20215 and invites the two bodies to strengthen their collaboration; 
 
36. Emphasizes the importance of strengthening cooperative action on technology development and transfer for the implementation of mitigation and adaptation action, including accelerating, encouraging and enabling innovation, and the importance of predictable, sustainable and adequate funding from diverse sources for the Technology Mechanism; 
 
VI. Loss and damage6 
 
37. Acknowledges that climate change has already caused and will increasingly cause loss and damage and that, as temperatures rise, impacts from climate and weather extremes, 
 
well as slow onset events, will pose an ever-greater social, economic and environmental threat; 
 
38. Also acknowledges the important role of a broad range of stakeholders at the local, national and regional level, including indigenous peoples and local communities, in averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
39. Reiterates the urgency of scaling up action and support, as appropriate, including finance, technology transfer and capacity-building, for implementing approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to these effects; 40. Urges developed country Parties, the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, United Nations entities and intergovernmental organizations and other bilateral and multilateral institutions, including non-governmental organizations and private sources, to provide enhanced and additional support for activities addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
41. Recognizes the importance of demand-driven technical assistance in building capacity to implement approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change; 
 
42. Welcomes the further operationalization of the Santiago network for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including the agreement on its functions and process for further developing its institutional arrangements; 
 
43. Endorses paragraphs 67–70 and 73–74 of decision 1/CMA.3; 7 
 
44. Acknowledges the importance of coherent action to respond to the scale of needs caused by the adverse impacts of climate change; 
 
45. Resolves to strengthen partnerships between developing and developed countries, funds, technical agencies, civil society and communities to enhance understanding of how approaches to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage can be improved; VII. Implementation 
 
46. Recalls that the round tables among Parties and non-Party stakeholders on pre-2020 
 
implementation and ambition held in 2018, 2019 and 2020 helped to highlight and enhance understanding of the efforts of and challenges faced by Parties in relation to action and support in the pre-2020 period, as well as of the work of the constituted bodies in that period; 47. Strongly urges all Parties that have not yet done so to meet any outstanding pledges under the Convention as soon as possible; 
 
48. Welcomes the action taken to unlock the potential for sectoral action to contribute to fulfilling and implementing national targets, particularly in emission-intensive sectors; 49. Recognizes the need to take into consideration the concerns of Parties with economies most affected by the impacts of response measures, particularly developing country Parties, in line with Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 10, of the Convention; 50. Also recognizes the importance of protecting, conserving and restoring ecosystems to deliver crucial services, including acting as sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases, reducing vulnerability to climate change impacts and supporting sustainable livelihoods, including for indigenous peoples and local communities; 
 
51. Encourages Parties to take an integrated approach to addressing the issues referred to in paragraph 50 above in national and local policy and planning decisions; 7 It is noted that discussions related to the governance of the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts did not produce an outcome; this is without prejudice to further consideration of this matter. 
 

 
6 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
52. Recognizes the need to ensure just transitions that promote sustainable development and eradication of poverty, and the creation of decent work and quality jobs, including through making financial flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emission and climate-resilient development, including through deployment and transfer of technology, and provision of support to developing country Parties; VIII. Collaboration 
 
53. Recognizes the importance of international collaboration on innovative climate action, including technological advancement, across all actors of society, sectors and regions, in contributing to progress towards the objective of the Convention and the goals of the Paris Agreement; 
 
54. Recalls Article 3, paragraph 5, of the Convention and the importance of cooperation to address climate change and support sustainable economic growth and development; 55. Recognizes the important role of non-Party stakeholders, including civil society, indigenous peoples, local communities, youth, children, local and regional governments and other stakeholders, in contributing to progress towards the objective of the Convention and the goals of the Paris Agreement; 
 
56. Welcomes the improvement of the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action8 
 
for enhancing ambition, the leadership and actions of the high-level champions, and the work of the secretariat on the Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action platform to support accountability and track progress of voluntary initiatives; 
 
57. Also welcomes the high-level communiqué9 on the regional climate weeks and encourages the continuation of regional climate weeks where Parties and non-Party stakeholders can strengthen their credible and durable response to climate change at the regional level; 
 
58. Welcomes the informal summary reports by the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on the ocean and climate change dialogue to consider how to strengthen adaptation and mitigation action and on the dialogue on the relationship between land and climate change adaptation related matters; 
 
59. Invites Parties to submit views on how to enhance climate action on land under the existing UNFCCC programmes and activities in paragraph 75 of the report on the dialogue on the relationship between land and climate change adaptation related matters referred to in paragraph 58 above and requests the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to prepare an informal summary report thereon and make it available to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session; 60. Invites the relevant work programmes and constituted bodies under the UNFCCC to consider how to integrate and strengthen ocean-based action in their existing mandates and workplans and to report on these activities within the existing reporting processes, as appropriate; 
 
61. Also invites the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice to hold an annual dialogue, starting at the fifty-sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (June 2022), to strengthen ocean-based action and to prepare an informal summary report thereon and make it available to the Conference of the Parties at its subsequent session; 
 
62. Urges Parties to swiftly begin implementing the Glasgow work programme on Action for Climate Empowerment, respecting, promoting and considering their respective obligations on human rights, as well as gender equality and empowerment of women; 63. Expresses appreciation for the outcomes of the sixteenth Conference of Youth, organized by the constituency of children and youth non-governmental organizations and held in Glasgow in October 2021, and the “Youth4Climate2021: Driving Ambition” event hosted by Italy in Milan, Italy, in September 2021; 
 
64. Urges Parties and stakeholders to ensure meaningful youth participation and representation in multilateral, national and local decision-making processes, including under the Convention and the Paris Agreement; 
 
65. Invites future Presidencies of the Conference of the Parties, with the support of the secretariat, to facilitate the organization of an annual youth-led climate forum for dialogue between Parties and youth in collaboration with the UNFCCC children and youth constituency and other youth organizations with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Glasgow work programme on Action for Climate Empowerment; 66. Emphasizes the important role of indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ culture and knowledge in effective action on climate change and urges Parties to actively involve indigenous peoples and local communities in designing and implementing climate action and to engage with the second three-year workplan for implementing the functions of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform, for 2022–2024; 
 
67. Expresses its recognition of the important role observer organizations play, including the nine non-governmental organization constituencies, in sharing their knowledge, and their calls to see ambitious action to meet the objectives of the Convention and in collaborating with Parties to that end; 
 
68. Encourages Parties to increase the full, meaningful and equal participation of women in climate action and to ensure gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation, which are vital for raising ambition and achieving climate goals; 69. Calls upon Parties to strengthen their implementation of the enhanced Lima work programme on gender and its gender action plan; 10 
 
70. Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in this decision; 
 
71. Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources. 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021 
 
 
 
10 See decision 3/CP.25, annex. 
 

 
8 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 2/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Report of the Adaptation Committee (for 2019, 2020 and 
 
2021) 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the work of the Adaptation Committee in 2019, 2020 and 2021 and takes note of the Adaptation Committee’s 2019, 2020 and 2021 reports; 1 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the technical support and guidance provided by the Adaptation Committee for enhancing implementation of adaptation action and support and underlines the importance of balanced, clear and relevant recommendations for all workstream activities in its workplans; 
 
3. 
 
 Welcomes the flexible workplan of the Adaptation Committee for 2022–2024; 2 
 
4. 
 
 Invites the Adaptation Committee to improve its efforts to measure the outreach of its events and publications by including, in its flexible workplan, the collection of statistics disaggregated by gender and region on its awareness-raising, outreach and information-sharing efforts such as events and publications; 
 
5. 
 
 Requests the Adaptation Committee to resume holding its regular meetings and events in person while offering the option of virtual attendance to ensure inclusive participation, including by observers, while acknowledging the challenges posed by online participation; 6. 
 
 Invites Parties to identify one or more adaptation contact points through their UNFCCC national focal points with a view to enhancing the dissemination of information between Parties and the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, as well as other relevant organizations and programme partners, such as partners of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, including on Parties’ efforts to formulate and implement national adaptation plans; 7. 
 
 Recalls decision 5/CP.22, mandating the review at its twenty-seventh session of the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee; 8. 
 
 Invites the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session (November 2022), as provided in decision 11/CMA.1, to participate in the review referred to in paragraph 7 above as it relates to the Paris Agreement; 9. 
 
 Welcomes the efforts of Parties that made submissions3 on the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee and takes note of their relevance for the review referred to in paragraph 7 above; 
 
10. Reiterates its invitation4 to Parties to submit views on the progress, effectiveness and performance of the Adaptation Committee and on the review process, with a view to informing that process, via the submission portal no later than three months prior to the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties; 
 
11. Encourages Parties to make available sufficient resources for the successful and timely implementation of the flexible workplan of the Adaptation Committee for 2022–2024. 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021
 
1 FCCC/SB/2019/3, FCCC/SB/2020/2 and FCCC/SB/2021/6. 
 
2 FCCC/SB/2021/6, annex. 
 
3 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/submissionsstaging/Pages/Home.aspx. 
 
4 See decision 5/CP.22, para. 12. 
 

 
9 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 3/CP.26 
 
 
 

 
 National adaptation plans 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 3/CP.17, 5/CP.17, 12/CP.18, 18/CP.19, 3/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 4/CP.21, 6/CP.22, 8/CP.24 and 7/CP.25, 
 
 
 
 Also recalling the objective of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans to reduce vulnerability to the impacts of climate change by building adaptive capacity and increasing resilience in developing countries and recognizing the role of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans in making progress towards the global goal on adaptation, 
 
 
 
 Taking note of the potential capacity of the Open NAP initiative of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to accelerate the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans in the least developed countries and inviting other developing countries to take part in this initiative, 
 
 
 
 Recognizing the continued support of the Adaptation Committee, the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and the secretariat to developing country Parties on the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, despite the limitations posed by the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic and its impacts on the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the submissions from Albania, Armenia, Cambodia, Kuwait, Nepal, Peru, South Africa, South Sudan, Timor-Leste and Tonga of their national adaptation plans in NAP 
 
Central, 1 bringing the total number of submitted national adaptation plans to 30; 2. 
 
 Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its sixtieth session (June 2024), to initiate the assessment of progress in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans referred to in decision 8/CP.24, paragraph 19, and to make recommendations on this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-ninth session (November 2024); 
 
3. 
 
 Decides on the following actions and steps necessary for the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the assessment referred to in paragraph 2 above: 
 
(a) 
 
Invite Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 1 February 2024, information on their progress towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, as well as on their experience, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received; 
 
(b) 
 
Invite Parties to provide information, guided by a questionnaire, 2 on an ongoing basis through NAP Central; 
 
(c) 
 
Request the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the progress towards the achievement of the objectives of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, as well as on experience, best practices, lessons learned, gaps and needs, and support provided and received, taking into account information contained in national reports under the Convention, the information referred to in paragraph 3(a–b) above, information from relevant events, including the NAP Expos, and information from other relevant sources; 
 
(d) 
 
Request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee, to organize a meeting of Party experts, at which the report referred to in paragraph 3(c) above would be considered, with a view to providing a summary of progress in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans; (e) 
 
Request the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, in collaboration with the Adaptation Committee and with the support of the secretariat, to prepare a report on the meeting referred to in paragraph 3(d) above, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixtieth session in its assessment of progress in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans; 
 
4. 
 
 Also decides that the assessment referred to in paragraph 2 above should take into account all the guiding principles of the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans contained in decision 5/CP.17, paragraph 3; 
 
5. 
 
 Requests the constituted bodies and programmes under the Convention to continue to provide information on their activities relevant to the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans as part of the annual progress report on national adaptation plans. 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 11 November 2021
 

 
11 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
Decision 4/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Long-term climate finance 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention, 
 
 Also recalling decisions 1/CP.16, paragraphs 2, 4 and 97–101, 1/CP.17, 2/CP.17, paragraphs 126–132, 4/CP.18, 3/CP.19, 5/CP.20, 1/CP.21, 5/CP.21, 7/CP.22, 6/CP.23, 3/CP.24, 11/CP.25, paragraph 10, and 5/CMA.2, paragraph 10, 
 
1. 
 
 Recalls the commitment of developed country Parties, in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation, to a goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 to address the needs of developing country Parties in accordance with decision 1/CP.16; 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the recent pledges made to the Adaptation Fund (totalling USD 356 
 
million) and to the Least Developed Countries Fund (totalling USD 605.3 million); 3. 
 
 Notes the continued efforts of developed country Parties towards reaching the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020, in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16; 4. 
 
 Notes with serious concern the gap in relation to the fulfilment of the goal of developed country Parties to mobilize jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020, including due to challenges in mobilizing finance from private sources; 
 
5. 
 
 Notes that a substantial component of climate finance from developed country Parties to developing country Parties is provided through public finance and urges developed country Parties to continue to scale up climate finance towards achieving the goal to mobilize jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020; 
 
6. 
 
 Acknowledges the need to support developing country Parties in implementing the Convention; 
 
7. 
 
 Recalls that, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 53, developed countries reaffirm the continuation of their existing collective mobilization goal through 2025 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation; 
 
8. 
 
 Notes with appreciation the first report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement1 and the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows; 2 
 
9. 
 
 Notes recent pledges to increase climate finance, acknowledges that some developed country Parties have already doubled their provision of adaptation finance and requests other developed country Parties to significantly increase their provision of adaptation finance, including by, as appropriate, considering doubling adaptation finance with the aim of achieving a balance between mitigation and adaptation; 
 
10. Welcomes the progress of Parties’ efforts to strengthen their domestic enabling environments in order to attract climate finance and requests Parties to continue to enhance their enabling environments and policy frameworks to facilitate the mobilization and effective deployment of climate finance in accordance with decision 3/CP.19; 3 
 
11. Emphasizes the importance of an effective and coherent climate finance landscape in maximizing access to climate finance in meeting the needs and priorities of developing country Parties; 
 
12. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to continue its work on definitions of climate finance, taking into account the submissions received from Parties on this matter, 
with a view to providing input for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session (November 2022); 
 
13. Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to undertake further work on mapping the available information relevant to Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement, including its reference to Article 9 thereof, with a view to providing input for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session; 14. Notes the biennial submissions received to date from developed country Parties on updated strategies and approaches for scaling up climate finance from 2014 to 2020 in accordance with decision 3/CP.19, paragraph 10, and takes note of the compilation and synthesis thereof; 4 
 
15. Notes the summary reports on the 2019 and 2020 in-session workshops on long-term climate finance, 5 in particular discussions on progress in mobilizing and scaling up climate finance held by the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session, and invites Parties and relevant institutions to consider the key messages contained therein; 16. Notes with appreciation the note by the Presidency of the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the Parties on the third biennial high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance, 6 particularly the key messages contained therein; 17. Welcomes the deliberations at the fourth high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance and looks forward to the summary to be prepared by the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session; 
 
18. Decides that continued discussions on long-term climate finance will conclude in 2027; 
 
19. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to prepare a report in 2022 on progress towards achieving the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation, taking into account the Climate Finance Delivery Plan7 and other relevant reports, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session, and to continue to contribute to assessing the achievement of the goal in the context of the preparation of its biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows; 20. Decides to convene biennial high-level ministerial dialogues on climate finance in 2022, 2024 and 2026 and requests the Presidency of the Conference of the Parties to summarize the deliberations at the dialogues for consideration by the Conference of the Parties in the year thereafter; 
 
21. Invites the Presidency of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties to organize the high-level ministerial dialogue on climate finance in 2022 on the progress and fulfilment of the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020; 22. Reiterates that the secretariat, in collaboration with the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, United Nations agencies and bilateral, regional and other multilateral channels, will continue to explore ways and means to assist developing country Parties in assessing their needs and priorities in a country-driven manner, including their technological and capacity-building needs, and in translating climate finance needs into action; 8 
 
23. Takes note of the estimated budgetary implications of the activities to be undertaken by the secretariat referred to in paragraphs 20 and 22 above; 
 
24. Requests that the actions of the secretariat called for in this decision be undertaken subject to the availability of financial resources. 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021
 
4 FCCC/CP/2019/INF.1. 
 
5 FCCC/CP/2019/4 and FCCC/CP/2021/6. 
 
6 FCCC/CP/2019/7. 
 
7 See https:/ ukcop26.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Climate-Finance-Delivery-Plan-1.pdf. 
 
8 See decision 6/CP.23, para. 10. 
 

 
13 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 5/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Matters relating to the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention, 
 
 
 
 Also recalling decisions 12/CP.2, 12/CP.3, 1/CP.16, paragraph 112, and 2/CP.17, paragraphs 120–121, 5/CP.18, 5/CP.19, 7/CP.19, 6/CP.20, 6/CP.21, 8/CP.22, 7/CP.23, 8/CP.23, 4/CP.24, 11/CP.25 and 5/CMA.2, 
 
 
 
 Taking note of decision 10/CMA.3, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the 2020 and 2021 reports of the Standing Committee on Finance; 1 
 
I. Fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows of the Standing Committee on Finance, 2 in particular the summary, 3 and endorses its key findings, as contained in annex I; 
 
3. 
 
 Notes that global climate finance flows were 16 per cent higher in 2017–2018 than in 2015–2016, reaching an annual average of USD 775 billion; the 2017–2018 annual average of public financial support reported by Parties included in Annex II to the Convention in their biennial reports4 (USD 48.7 billion) represents an increase of 2.7 per cent from the annual average reported for 2015–2016; the annual average of climate finance from multilateral development banks’ own resources to developing countries and emerging economies (USD 36.6 billion) represents a 50 per cent increase since 2015–2016; and UNFCCC funds and multilateral climate funds approved USD 2.2 billion and USD 3.1 billion for climate finance projects in 2017 and 2018, respectively; 
 
4. 
 
 Welcomes the improved granularity of data in the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows and encourages developed country Parties and climate finance providers, as well as multilateral and financial institutions, private finance providers and other relevant institutions, to continue to enhance the availability of granular, country-level data on mitigation and adaptation finance; 
 
5. 
 
 Calls upon developed country Parties and other climate finance providers to continue to enhance the harmonization of methodologies for tracking and reporting climate finance provided and mobilized; 
 
6. 
 
 Recognizes the fact that there is no multilaterally agreed definition of climate finance, notes the submissions received in response to decisions 11/CP.25 and 5/CMA.2, which highlighted that some Parties noted how the lack of a common definition impacts the ability to track and assess climate finance, while other Parties mentioned that a single definition would not be useful, and also notes that the operational definitions in use generally reflect a common understanding of what is considered mitigation and adaptation finance; 7. 
 
 Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to continue its work on definitions of climate finance, taking into account the submissions received from Parties on this matter, with a view to providing input for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session (November 2022); 
 
1 FCCC/CP/2020/4−FCCC/PA/CMA/2020/3 and FCCC/CP/2021/10–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7. 
 
2 Standing Committee on Finance. 2021. Fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows. Bonn: UNFCCC. Available at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/54307_1 
 
%20-%20UNFCCC%20BA%202020%20-%20Report%20-%20V4.pdf. 
 
3 FCCC/CP/2021/10/Add.1–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7/Add.1. 
 
4 Reports submitted as at October 2020. 
 

 
14 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
8. 
 
 Invites the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and other institutions providing climate finance to consider the operational definitions of climate finance of the Standing Committee on Finance with a view to ensuring that finance provided addresses the needs of developing country Parties, while respecting their existing policies; 
 
9. 
 
 Welcomes the mapping of the information relevant to Article 2, paragraph 1(c), of the Paris Agreement in the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows and takes note of the key findings of the report, including that banks representing over USD 37 trillion in assets and institutional investors with USD 6.6 trillion in assets have pledged to align their lending and investments with net zero emissions by 2050; 
 
10. Encourages Parties to ensure that just transition financing is incorporated into approaches to align climate action with the goals of the Paris Agreement; II. First report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and 
 

 
the Paris Agreement 
11. Welcomes the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement5 of the Standing Committee on Finance, in particular the executive summary, 6 and endorses its key findings and recommendations, as contained in annex II; 
 
12. Notes that nationally determined contributions from 153 Parties included 4,274 needs, with 1,782 costed needs identified across 78 nationally determined contributions, cumulatively amounting to USD 5.8–5.9 trillion up until 2030, and that, although developing country Parties identified more adaptation needs than mitigation needs, more costs were identified for the latter, which may not imply that mitigation needs are greater but rather that there is a lack of available data, tools and capacity for assessing adaptation needs; 13. Also notes that the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement is the first of its kind, with important areas that will need to be further developed; 14. Further notes that the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement does not fully cover the needs and costs of developing countries and all regions as a result of limited availability of information and acknowledges that financial and technical support will enhance developing countries’ abilities to update the reporting of qualitative and quantitative information and data on their needs; 
 
15. Expresses its concern that the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement does not have disaggregated data for small island developing States; 16. Emphasizes that there is a particular challenge in deriving cost estimates for climate adaptation and enhancing resilience needs and, in this context, deriving cost estimates for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage needs; 
 
17. Encourages developing country Parties to consider the insights into methodologies identified in the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement when costing and determining needs; 
 
18. Invites the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism, United Nations agencies, multilateral and bilateral financial institutions, and other relevant institutions to make use of the information contained in the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement when supporting developing country Parties in identifying and costing needs; 19. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance, in preparing future reports on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement, to continue to reach out to developing country Parties and relevant developing country stakeholders when generating data and information on needs; 
 
III. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
20. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of Belgium, Japan and Norway and to the European Commission for their financial contributions to support the work of the Standing Committee on Finance; 
 
21. Endorses the workplan of the Standing Committee on Finance for 20227 and underlines the importance of the Standing Committee on Finance focusing its work in 2022 
 
in accordance with its current mandates; 
 
22. Endorses the outline of the technical report of the fifth Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows of the Standing Committee on Finance and underscores that this report will continue to contribute to assessing the achievement of the goal of mobilizing jointly USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation, in accordance with decision 1/CP.16; 8 
 
23. Notes the high-level summary report of the first part of the 2021 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance on finance for nature-based solutions carried out in a hybrid format on 15 and 16 October 2021 and requests the Standing Committee on Finance to organize the second part of the Forum in 2022, subject to health and safety considerations arising from the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic; 
 
24. Notes that the Standing Committee on Finance was not able to produce draft guidance to the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism and that it has not agreed on recommendations from the fourth (2020) Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows, and in this regard requests the Committee to improve its working modalities; 25. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Standing Committee on Finance in enhancing engagement with stakeholders in the context of its workplan; 26. Encourages the Standing Committee on Finance to continue to enhance its efforts towards ensuring gender-responsiveness in implementing its workplan; 
 
27. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to report to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session on its progress in implementing its 2022 workplan; 28. Also requests the Standing Committee on Finance to consider the guidance provided to it in other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties. 
 
7 FCCC/CP/2021/10–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7, annex II. 
 
8 FCCC/CP/2021/10/Add.5–FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/7/Add.5. 
 

 

 
 
 Decision 6/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decision 3/CP.17, annex, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the reports of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session, 1 including the list of actions taken by the Board of the Green Climate Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Board) in response to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties; 
 
2. 
 
 Also welcomes the continued efforts of the Green Climate Fund to make a significant and ambitious contribution to the global effort to meet the goals set by the international community in relation to combating climate change; 
 
3. 
 
 Further welcomes the progress of the Green Climate Fund in 2020–2021, including in relation to guidance provided by the Conference of the Parties: (a) 
 
The increase in the number of funding proposals approved, which brings the total amount approved by the Board to USD 10 billion to support implementation of 190 
 
adaptation and mitigation projects and programmes in 127 developing countries; (b) 
 
The increase in the number of entities accredited by the Board, which brings the total number of accredited entities to 112, of which 72 are direct access entities; (c) 
 
The approval of its Updated Strategic Plan for 2020–2023, 2 Integrated Results Management Framework and a results tracking tool; 
 
(d) 
 
The revision of its environmental and social policy to reaffirm its commitment to preventing sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment; administrative remedies and exclusions policy; and guidelines to facilitate consideration by the Board of Independent Redress Mechanism reports on requests for reconsideration, grievances and complaints; 
 
(e) 
 
The approval of its evaluation policy; 
 
(f) 
 
The continued collaboration between the Green Climate Fund, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Technology Executive Committee; (g) 
 
The collaboration between the Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation Committee and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group; 
 
4. 
 
 Welcomes the long-term vision on complementarity, coherence and collaboration between the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility3 and requests the Board to enhance coherence and complementarity with other climate finance delivery channels with a view to enhancing the impact and effectiveness of its work; 5. 
 
 Encourages further collaboration and engagement between the Green Climate Fund, the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Technology Executive Committee, through continued joint work, as well as collaboration on events, and taking into consideration elements related to gender mainstreaming and observer engagement; 6. 
 
 Reiterates the request to the Board to continue efforts to maintain the balance in the allocation of resources between adaptation and mitigation; 
 
1 FCCC/CP/2020/5 and FCCC/CP/2021/8. 
 
2 Contained in Green Climate Fund document GCF/B.27/21, annex II. Available at 
 
https:/ www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf-b27-21. 
 
3 Contained in Global Environment Facility document GEF/C.60/08, annex I. Available at 
 
https:/ www.thegef.org/council-meeting-documents/long-term-vision-complementarity-coherence-
 
and-collaboration-between-green. 
 

 
48 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
7. 
 
 Encourages the Board to further clarify the role of data and information from, inter alia, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and traditional, local and indigenous knowledge and practices in the assessment of concept notes, project preparation funding applications and funding proposals; 
 
8. 
 
 Also encourages the Board to strengthen country ownership and regional management by proactively engaging national designated authorities in all aspects of the project and programme cycle; 
 
9. 
 
 Takes note of the exceptional circumstances of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic and its significant impact on the implementation of the Board’s updated four-year workplan, recognizes the Board’s efforts during that period and encourages the Board to continue to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its work; 
 
10. Takes note of the continued efforts of the Board to provide financial resources for activities relevant to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in developing country Parties consistent with the existing investment, results framework and funding windows and structures of the Green Climate Fund, including through the Project Preparation Facility and the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme; 
 
11. Notes the significant number of remaining policy gaps, including updating the accreditation framework to include approving the project-specific assessment approach, updating the simplified approval process, approving the policy on programmatic approaches, completing policies related to the investment framework, and addressing matters related to the Private Sector Facility and strategy, as well as outstanding matters from the rules of procedure of the Board, 4 and urges the Board to prioritize closing the policy gaps as a matter of urgency and to explore diversifying its selection of financial instruments for addressing climate risk including parametric insurance for climatic events; 12. Takes note of the engagement of the President of the Conference of the Parties on the matter of granting privileges and immunities for the Green Climate Fund and its officials and invites the Board to continue efforts to ensure that the Fund enjoys privileges and immunities as are necessary; 
 
13. Urges the Board to finalize in a timely manner its work related to the guidance and arrangements of the Conference of the Parties on financing for forests and alternative approaches as mandated by decision 7/CP.21, paragraphs 23–25; 
 
14. Encourages the Board to continue the integration of gender considerations into its activities, including through its gender policy and by promoting gender balance across the structures of the Fund; 
 
15. Invites the Board to consider ways of improving access to the Fund for local non-governmental and private sector organizations; 
 
16. Also invites Parties to submit to the secretariat views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Green Climate Fund via the submission portal5 no later than 10 
 
weeks prior to the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2022); 17. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 16 above when preparing its draft guidance for the Green Climate Fund for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session (November 2022); 
 
18. Also requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision; 
 
4 Available at https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/rules-procedure. 
 
5 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/submissionsstaging/Pages/Home.aspx. 
 

 
49 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
19. Takes note of decision 11/CMA.3 and decides to transmit to the Green Climate Fund the guidance from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement contained in paragraphs 2–8 of that decision. 6 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021
 
6 In accordance with decision 1/CP.21, para. 61. 
 

 
50 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 7/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment 
 

 
Facility 
 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling decision 11/CP.1, paragraph 1(c), and decision 13/CP.25, 
 
 
 
 Noting paragraph 9(b) of the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility, 1 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the reports of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-sixth session and their addenda, 2 including the responses of the Global Environment Facility to guidance received from the Conference of the Parties; 2. 
 
 Also welcomes the work undertaken by the Global Environment Facility during its reporting period (1 July 2019 to 30 June 2021), including with regard to: (a) 
 
Approval of the climate change projects and programmes approved during the reporting period under the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund; 
 
(b) 
 
Integration of climate change priorities into its other focal areas and the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions achieved through such integration; (c) 
 
Improvement in coordination with the Green Climate Fund; 
 
(d) 
 
Adoption of its private sector engagement strategy; 3 
 
(e) 
 
Adoption of the sustainable bond strategy for the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund; 4 
 
3. 
 
 Encourages the Global Environment Facility, as part of the eighth replenishment process, to duly consider ways to increase the financial resources allocated for climate action, including the climate change focal area and climate co-benefits, taking into account the reporting requirement referred to in paragraph 6 of decision 12/CMA.3, and to apply a coherent approach across its focal areas to prioritizing projects that generate environmental co-benefits; 
 
4. 
 
 Calls upon developed country Parties to make financial contributions to the Global Environment Facility to contribute to a robust eighth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility to support developing countries in implementing the Convention and encourages additional voluntary financial contributions to the eighth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility; 
 
5. 
 
 Takes note of ongoing discussions on the eighth replenishment process regarding its allocation policies under the System for Transparent Allocation of Resources and invites the Global Environment Facility to duly consider the needs and priorities of developing country Parties when allocating resources to developing country Parties; 6. 
 
 Takes note of the ongoing work of the Global Environment Facility in monitoring the concentration and geographical and thematic coverage, as well as the effectiveness, efficiency and engagement, of the Global Environment Facility Partnership and encourages the Global Environment Facility to consider ways to enhance participation of additional national and regional entities from developing country Parties in the Partnership, including by allowing them to serve as executing agencies, as appropriate; 7. 
 
 Requests the Global Environment Facility to consider ways to further enhance the role of national agencies and civil society organizations as executing agencies in order to enhance country ownership of projects and programmes funded by the Global Environment Facility and prevent implementing agencies from serving simultaneously as executing agencies; 8. 
 
 Welcomes with appreciation the contributions made by developed country Parties to the Least Developed Countries Fund, amounting to USD 605.3 million, and encourages additional voluntary financial contributions to the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund to support adaptation and technology transfer; 9. 
 
 Requests the Global Environment Facility, as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention entrusted with the operation of the Special Climate Change Fund, to continue to assist developing country Parties in accessing resources in an efficient manner; 
 
10. Calls upon the Global Environment Facility to continue to improve the governance framework for its agencies and the standards to which the implementing partners are accountable; 
 
11. Takes note that financial resources allocated for the non-grant instrument under the seventh replenishment of the Global Environment Facility increased to USD 136 million from USD 110 million under the sixth replenishment and encourages the Global Environment Facility, during its discussions on the instrument under the eighth replenishment, to continue to take into account needs and priorities of developing countries, as well as their different national circumstances; 
 
12. Requests the Global Environment Facility to consider updating its policy on gender equality to include protection against discrimination; 
 
13. Recognizes that the Global Environment Facility does not impose minimum thresholds and/or specific types or sources of co-financing or investment mobilized in its review of individual projects and programmes; 5 
 
14. Encourages the Global Environment Facility to reinforce its efforts to engage with and mobilize resources from the private sector under its eighth replenishment; 15. Takes note of ongoing discussions within the Global Environment Facility concerning the Small Grants Programme under the eighth replenishment and invites the Global Environment Facility to consider increasing the funding ceiling per project to provide adequate financial and technical support to communities and civil society organizations; 16. Urges the Global Environment Facility to enhance its support for projects that engage with stakeholders at the local level, and to continue to provide funding for projects related to technology training and scale up South–South cooperation and triangular cooperation with the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network; 17. Welcomes the long-term vision on complementarity, coherence and collaboration between the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility6 and requests the Global Environment Facility Council to enhance coherence and complementarity with other climate finance delivery channels with a view to enhancing the impact and effectiveness of its work; 18. Also requests the Global Environment Facility, as part of the eighth replenishment process, to take note of the needs and priorities for climate finance, including those identified in the first report on the determination of the needs of developing country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement, contributions, national communications and national adaptation plans, as well as in other sources of available information, including the biennial assessment and overview of climate finance flows and other relevant reports; 
 
19. Invites Parties to submit views and recommendations on elements of guidance for the Global Environment Facility via the submission portal8 no later than 10 weeks prior to the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2022); 20. Requests the Standing Committee on Finance to take into consideration the submissions referred to in paragraph 19 above when preparing its draft guidance for the Global Environment Facility for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-seventh session and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session (November 2022); 
 
21. Also requests the Global Environment Facility to include in its annual report to the Conference of the Parties information on the steps it has taken to implement the guidance provided in this decision; 
 
22. Takes note of decision 12/CMA.3 and decides to transmit to the Global Environment Facility the guidance from the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement contained in paragraphs 2–10 of that decision. 9 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021
 
8 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/submissionsstaging/Pages/Home.aspx. 
 
9 In accordance with decision 1/CP.21, para. 61. 
 

 
53 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 8/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Compilation and synthesis of, and summary report on the 
 
in-session workshop on, biennial communications of 
 
information related to Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement 
 
 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling Articles 4 and 11 of the Convention, 
 
 
 
 Also recalling decision 12/CMA.1, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the compilation and synthesis1 prepared by the secretariat of the information contained in the first biennial communications in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement; 
 
2. 
 
 Also welcomes the summary report2 on the biennial in-session workshop on information to be provided by Parties in accordance with Article 9, paragraph 5, of the Paris Agreement held on 11 June 2021; 
 
3. 
 
 Takes note of decision 14/CMA.3. 
 
 12th plenary meeting 
 
 13 November 2021
 
1 FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/3. 
 
2 FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/5. 
 

 
54 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 9/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Enhancing climate technology development and transfer 
 

 
through the Technology Mechanism 
 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling decisions 2/CP.17, 1/CP.21, 15/CP.22, 21/CP.22, 13/CP.23, 15/CP.23, 12/CP.24, 13/CP.24 and 14/CP.25, 
 
1. 
 
 Welcomes the joint annual reports of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2020 and 20211 and commends their efforts to advance their work amid the continuing pandemic; 
 
2. 
 
 Welcomes the continuing collaboration of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and invites them to strengthen their collaboration and the provision of feedback between them with a view to ensuring coherence and synergy and effective implementation of the mandates of the Technology Mechanism, inter alia by exploring the preparation of a joint programme; 
 
3. 
 
 Welcomes the collaboration between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism and encourages the continuation of this collaboration; 4. 
 
 Takes note of the challenges faced by the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network in implementing their mandates during the continuing pandemic and welcomes their efforts to address these challenges; 5. 
 
 Also welcomes the implementation of monitoring and evaluation systems of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network and requests them to continue reporting on the results and impacts of their work; 6. 
 
 Welcomes the efforts of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network to draw upon the work of UNFCCC constituencies to increase the impacts of work under the Technology Mechanism; 
 
I. Activities and performance of the Technology Executive 
 
Committee in 2020–2021 
 
7. 
 
 Appreciates the flexibility of the Technology Executive Committee in adapting to new ways of working, including through the use of virtual platforms for meetings and events, and in constructively engaging with its members, task forces, observers and other relevant stakeholders, thereby facilitating progress in successfully implementing activities in its rolling workplan for 2019–2022; 2 
 
8. 
 
 Invites Parties and relevant stakeholders to consider the recommendations of the Technology Executive Committee on ways forward and actions to be taken on the basis of the outcomes of the technical expert meetings on mitigation in 2020; 3 
 
9. 
 
 Also invites Parties and relevant stakeholders to consider the key messages and recommendations of the Technology Executive Committee for 2020–2021 on technology policy in the following areas: technology needs assessment; technologies for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage in coastal zones; international collaborative research, development and demonstration; innovative approaches to stimulating the uptake of existing clean technology solutions; and endogenous capacities and technologies; 4 
 
1 FCCC/SB/2020/4 and FCCC/SB/2021/5. 
 
2 Available at https://unfccc.int/ttclear/tec. 
 
3 See document FCCC/SB/2020/4, annex III. 
 
4 See documents FCCC/SB/2020/4 and FCCC/SB/2021/5. 
 

 
55 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
10. Notes with appreciation the collaboration of the Technology Executive Committee with other constituted bodies and relevant organizations in implementing its workplan activities; 
 
11. Notes that private sector engagement is crucial for translating research, development and demonstration results into market-deployable climate technologies and welcomes the activities of the Technology Executive Committee in this regard; 12. Also welcomes the successful organization of the Technology Day events in 2020–
 
20215 to promote innovative approaches to adaptation technologies related to climate-smart agriculture and ocean and coastal adaptation and encourages the Technology Executive Committee to continue using such events to strengthen the impacts of its work and to reach target audiences; 
 
13. Commends the Technology Executive Committee on its efforts to mainstream gender considerations in its work, including through a structured approach that strives to ensure that gender focal points play an active role and gender balance is achieved with regard to the speakers at all its events in 2021, and looks forward to its continuing efforts in this regard; 14. Encourages the Technology Executive Committee to further increase its outreach and stakeholder engagement activities to disseminate its policy and publications, especially to target audiences; 
 
15. Notes with concern that the Technology Executive Committee membership composition prevents certain Parties from fully participating in its work; II. Activities and performance of the Climate Technology Centre and Network in 2020–2021 
 
16. Welcomes the initiative of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to adapt to operational challenges resulting from the continuing pandemic by focusing on the implementation of technical assistance requests and making use of online stakeholder engagement and capacity-building activities; 
 
17. Appreciates the multi-country, regional and programmatic approaches of Climate Technology Centre and Network services to streamlining Climate Technology Centre and Network operations and looks forward to the continuation of these approaches; 18. Takes note of the activities, performance and key messages of the Climate Technology Centre and Network in 2020–2021, including challenges faced and lessons learned; 19. Welcomes the efforts of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to be more inclusive by implementing its gender action plan and enhancing engagement with the constituencies of women and gender, youth and indigenous peoples organizations; 20. Notes with appreciation that the Climate Technology Centre and Network is now the largest provider of readiness support for technology under the Green Climate Fund Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme and encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue its collaboration through the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme and to extend its engagement through the Project Preparation Facility with the Green Climate Fund; 
 
21. Welcomes with appreciation the establishment of the Climate Technology Centre and Network partnership and liaison office in Songdo, Republic of Korea, which will focus its work on, inter alia, collaborating with the Green Climate Fund and research and development, and invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to report on experience and lessons learned therefrom; 
 
22. Welcomes with appreciation the continuing collaboration between the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Global Environment Facility; 5 See https:/ unfccc.int/ttclear/events/2020/2020_event07. 
 

 
56 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
23. Welcomes the action of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to engage with the private sector in developing and implementing its programme of work, including the delivery of technical assistance and capacity development through small and medium-sized enterprises and its efforts to enhance engagement with the private sector and Network members; 
 
24. Invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue its efforts to support developing countries in preparing and updating technology needs assessments and technology action plans, as well as their implementation, upon request; 25. Also invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue providing support for enhancing the capacity of national designated entities in developing countries to enable them to fulfil their roles; 
 
26. Encourages developed country national designated entities to consider how they can engage in the efforts of the Climate Technology Centre and Network; 27. Notes with appreciation the information reported on experience and lessons learned with regard to pro bono and in-kind contributions6 and encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue its efforts to mobilize such contributions; 28. Appreciates the efforts of the Climate Technology Centre to mobilize a diverse range of resources, 7 including from multilateral development banks, private sector channels, philanthropic organizations, Network members, the United Nations Environment Programme and other United Nations agencies, as well as new contributions to the multi-donor trust fund and multi-year commitments that enable the Climate Technology Centre and Network to successfully implement its mandates, and encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue these efforts; 
 
29. Expresses its gratitude for the financial contributions provided by Parties to support the work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to date; 30. Recognizes the challenge of securing sustainable financial resources for the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2022 and requests the Climate Technology Centre and Network to strengthen its resource mobilization efforts to ensure sustainable funding for effectively implementing its programme of work; 
 
31. Encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to participate in events that raise the profile and awareness of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, expand its outreach and increase its impact in order to enhance knowledge-sharing and uptake of climate technologies. 
 
 10th plenary meeting 
 
 11 November 2021
 
6 Pursuant to decision 14/CP.25, para. 22; see also document FCCC/SB/2020/4, annex V. 
 
7 Pursuant to decision 14/CP.25, para. 26. 
 

 
57 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 
 
 
 Decision 10/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Review of the constitution of the Advisory Board of the 
 

 
Climate Technology Centre and Network 
 
 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 
 
 Recalling decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, regarding the functions of the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, 
 
 
 
 Also recalling decision 14/CP.18, annex II, regarding the constitution of the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, 
 
 
 
 Pursuant to decision 14/CP.18, annex II, paragraph 16, 1. 
 
 Agrees to amend the constitution of the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to that contained in the annex; 
 
2. 
 
 Notes that the amendment of the constitution of the Advisory Board should ensure its effective functioning. 
 

 
58 
FCCC/CP/2021/12/Add.1 
 

 

 
 
 
 Decision 11/CP.26 
 
 
 
 Second review of the Climate Technology Centre and 
 

 
Network 
 The Conference of the Parties, 
 
 Recalling decisions 1/CP.16, 2/CP.17, 1/CP.18, 14/CP.18, 14/CP.23 and 12/CP.24, 1. 
 
 Welcomes the report on the second independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network (hereinafter referred to as the second independent review)1 commissioned by the secretariat in response to decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, paragraph 20, and decision 14/CP.23, paragraph 10; 2. 
 
 Welcomes with appreciation the dialogue to consider the findings of the second independent review2 organized by the secretariat; 3 
 
3. 
 
 Also welcomes with appreciation the contributions and support provided by Parties and relevant organizations for the activities of the Climate Technology Centre and Network during the review period; 
 
4. 
 
 Notes the key findings of the second independent review regarding the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability of the services provided by the Climate Technology Centre and Network, as contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above; 4 
 
5. 
 
 Also notes the main successes and challenges regarding the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, as contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above; 5 
 
6. 
 
 Further notes that the contribution of the Climate Technology Centre and Network to transformational change is expected to be sustainable and result in adaptation, mitigation and socioeconomic co-benefits; 
 
7. 
 
 Welcomes the new organizational arrangements of the Climate Technology Centre at the regional level, undertaken with the aim of enhancing support for technical assistance requests; 
 
8. 
 
 Also welcomes the management response of the United Nations Environment Programme to the second independent review, as contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above; 6 
 
9. 
 
 Decides to renew the memorandum of understanding between the Conference of the Parties and the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the hosting of the Climate Technology Centre, as contained in annex I to decision 14/CP.18, for a further five-year period; 
 
10. Authorizes the Executive Secretary to sign, on behalf of the Conference of the Parties, the memorandum of understanding referred to in paragraph 9 above; 11. Encourages the United Nations Environment Programme as host of the Climate Technology Centre, in collaboration with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and in consultation with the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, to implement the recommendations contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above when implementing its further activities relevant to the work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network, including those activities relevant to the third programme of work of the Climate Technology Centre and Network; 
 
12. Requests the Climate Technology Centre and Network to include in its joint annual report with the Technology Executive Committee for 2022 and in the subsequent reports to the Conference of the Parties, through the subsidiary bodies, information on its plans and actions undertaken in response to the recommendations contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 above; 
 
13. Notes that the Climate Technology Centre and Network continues to face challenges that need attention, including limited and insufficient financial resources and a constrained budget for implementing its mandates given its broad scope of services; administrative and communication challenges related to its management structure; lack of resources of the developing country national designated entities to better engage and fulfil its role; and limited engagement and synergies among the network members; 
 
14. Invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the Technology Executive Committee to explore ways to strengthen their collaboration and thereby enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Technology Mechanism; 
 
15. Also invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance in its provision of services the engagement of private sector Network members with a view to reinforcing its position as a climate technology ‘matchmaker’; 
 
16. Encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance efforts to promote active collaboration among national designated entities; 17. Acknowledges the effectiveness of support provided by national designated entities to developing country Parties for requesting technical assistance from the Climate Technology Centre and Network, which led to all the requests received being deemed eligible, and encourages them to continue to provide such support; 
 
18. Also encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network to enhance its provision of support for strengthening the capacity of national designated entities in developing countries with a view to enabling them to fulfil their roles; 
 
19. Reiterates that enhanced and sustainable financial support should be provided to the Climate Technology Centre and Network for the full and effective implementation of its mandate; 
 
20. Encourages the Climate Technology Centre and Network, in collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme and in consultation with the Advisory Board, to liaise with the UNFCCC secretariat to further enhance resource mobilization from various sources, including the Financial Mechanism; bilateral, multilateral and private sector channels; philanthropic sources; and financial and in-kind contributions from the host organization and participants in the Network; 
 
21. Invites the Climate Technology Centre and Network to continue working with the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism to further strengthen their linkages with the aim of scaling up the Climate Technology Centre and Network’s provision of technical support to developing country Parties; 
 
22. Decides to align the periodicity of the independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network with the periodic assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of the support provided to the Technology Mechanism in supporting the implementation of the Paris Agreement on matters relating to technology development and transfer7 by changing the periodicity of the independent review from four to five years until the Conference of the Parties reviews the functions of the Climate Technology Centre and Network at its thirty-first session (2026) and decides whether to extend its term; 8 
 
23. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to start considering, at its sixty-second session (2025), matters relating to the alignment between processes pertaining to the independent review of the Climate Technology Centre and Network and the periodic assessment of the Technology Mechanism with a view to recommending a draft decision on 
this matter for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its thirty-first session; 
 
24. Also requests the secretariat, pursuant to decision 2/CP.17, annex VII, paragraph 20, and subject to the availability of financial resources, to commission the third independent review of the effectiveness of the Climate Technology Centre and Network for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its thirty-first session; 
 
25. Further requests the secretariat to organize a dialogue, in conjunction with the thirty-first session of the Conference of the Parties, to consider the findings of the third independent review of the effective implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network. 
 
 11th plenary meeting 
 
 12 November 2021 
 

 
63 

